===== PAGE 1 =====
3 Introduction to computer science
In natural science, Nature has given us a world and we’re just to discover its
laws. In computers, we can stuff laws into it and create a world.
– Alan Kay
Our ﬁeld is still in its embryonic stage. It’s great that we haven’t been around
for 2000 years. We are still at a stage where very, very important results occur
in front of our eyes.
– Michael Rabin, on computer science
Algorithms are the key concept of computer science. An algorithm is a precise recipe for
performing some task, such as the elementary algorithm for adding two numbers which
we all learn as children. This chapter outlines the modern theory of algorithms developed
by computer science. Our fundamental model for algorithms will be the Turing machine.
This is an idealized computer, rather like a modern personal computer, but with a simpler
set of basic instructions, and an idealized unbounded memory. The apparent simplicity
of Turing machines is misleading; they are very powerful devices. We will see that they
can be used to execute any algorithm whatsoever, even one running on an apparently
much more powerful computer.
The fundamental question we are trying to address in the study of algorithms is: what
resources are required to perform a given computational task? This question splits up
naturally into two parts. First, we’d like to understand what computational tasks are pos-
sible, preferably by giving explicit algorithms for solving speciﬁc problems. For example,
we have many excellent examples of algorithms that can quickly sort a list of numbers
into ascending order. The second aspect of this question is to demonstrate limitations
on what computational tasks may be accomplished. For example, lower bounds can be
given for the number of operations that must be performed by any algorithm which
sorts a list of numbers into ascending order. Ideally, these two tasks – the ﬁnding of
algorithms for solving computational problems, and proving limitations on our ability to
solve computational problems – would dovetail perfectly. In practice, a signiﬁcant gap
often exists between the best techniques known for solving a computational problem, and
the most stringent limitations known on the solution. The purpose of this chapter is to
give a broad overview of the tools which have been developed to aid in the analysis of
computational problems, and in the construction and analysis of algorithms to solve such
problems.
Why should a person interested in quantum computation and quantum information
spend time investigating classical computer science? There are three good reasons for this
effort. First, classical computer science provides a vast body of concepts and techniques
which may be reused to great effect in quantum computation and quantum informa-
tion. Many of the triumphs of quantum computation and quantum information have
come by combining existing ideas from computer science with novel ideas from quantum

===== PAGE 2 =====
Introduction to computer science
121
mechanics. For example, some of the fast algorithms for quantum computers are based
upon the Fourier transform, a powerful tool utilized by many classical algorithms. Once
it was realized that quantum computers could perform a type of Fourier transform much
more quickly than classical computers this enabled the development of many important
quantum algorithms.
Second, computer scientists have expended great effort understanding what resources
are required to perform a given computational task on a classical computer. These results
can be used as the basis for a comparison with quantum computation and quantum
information. For example, much attention has been focused on the problem of ﬁnding the
prime factors of a given number. On a classical computer this problem is believed to have
no ‘efﬁcient’ solution, where ‘efﬁcient’ has a meaning we’ll explain later in the chapter.
What is interesting is that an efﬁcient solution to this problem is known for quantum
computers. The lesson is that, for this task of ﬁnding prime factors, there appears to be a
gap between what is possible on a classical computer and what is possible on a quantum
computer. This is both intrinsically interesting, and also interesting in the broader sense
that it suggests such a gap may exist for a wider class of computational problems than
merely the ﬁnding of prime factors. By studying this speciﬁc problem further, it may be
possible to discern features of the problem which make it more tractable on a quantum
computer than on a classical computer, and then act on these insights to ﬁnd interesting
quantum algorithms for the solution of other problems.
Third, and most important, there is learning to think like a computer scientist. Com-
puter scientists think in a rather different style than does a physicist or other natural
scientist. Anybody wanting a deep understanding of quantum computation and quantum
information must learn to think like a computer scientist at least some of the time; they
must instinctively know what problems, what techniques, and most importantly what
problems are of greatest interest to a computer scientist.
The structure of this chapter is as follows. In Section 3.1 we introduce two models for
computation: the Turing machine model, and the circuit model. The Turing machine
model will be used as our fundamental model for computation. In practice, however,
we mostly make use of the circuit model of computation, and it is this model which is
most useful in the study of quantum computation. With our models for computation
in hand, the remainder of the chapter discusses resource requirements for computation.
Section 3.2 begins by overviewing the computational tasks we are interested in as well
as discusing some associated resource questions. It continues with a broad look at the
key concepts of computational complexity, a ﬁeld which examines the time and space
requirements necessary to solve particular computational problems, and provides a broad
classiﬁcation of problems based upon their difﬁculty of solution. Finally, the section
concludes with an examination of the energy resources required to perform computations.
Surprisingly, it turns out that the energy required to perform a computation can be made
vanishingly small, provided one can make the computation reversible. We explain how to
construct reversible computers, and explain some of the reasons they are important both
for computer science and for quantum computation and quantum information. Section 3.3
concludes the chapter with a broad look at the entire ﬁeld of computer science, focusing
on issues of particular relevance to quantum computation and quantum information.

===== PAGE 3 =====
122
Introduction to computer science
3.1
Models for computation
...algorithms are concepts that have existence apart from any programming
language.
– Donald Knuth
What does it mean to have an algorithm for performing some task? As children we all
learn a procedure which enables us to add together any two numbers, no matter how
large those numbers are. This is an example of an algorithm. Finding a mathematically
precise formulation of the concept of an algorithm is the goal of this section.
Historically, the notion of an algorithm goes back centuries; undergraduates learn
Euclid’s two thousand year old algorithm for ﬁnding the greatest common divisor of two
positive integers. However, it wasn’t until the 1930s that the fundamental notions of
the modern theory of algorithms, and thus of computation, were introduced, by Alonzo
Church, Alan Turing, and other pioneers of the computer era. This work arose in response
to a profound challenge laid down by the great mathematician David Hilbert in the early
part of the twentieth century. Hilbert asked whether or not there existed some algorithm
which could be used, in principle, to solve all the problems of mathematics. Hilbert
expected that the answer to this question, sometimes known as the entscheidungsproblem,
would be yes.
Amazingly, the answer to Hilbert’s challenge turned out to be no: there is no algorithm
to solve all mathematical problems. To prove this, Church and Turing had to solve the
deep problem of capturing in a mathematical deﬁnition what we mean when we use the
intuitive concept of an algorithm. In so doing, they laid the foundations for the modern
theory of algorithms, and consequently for the modern theory of computer science.
In this chapter, we use two ostensibly different approaches to the theory of computa-
tion. The ﬁrst approach is that proposed by Turing. Turing deﬁned a class of machines,
now known as Turing machines, in order to capture the notion of an algorithm to perform
a computational task. In Section 3.1.1, we describe Turing machines, and then discuss
some of the simpler variants of the Turing machine model. The second approach is via
the circuit model of computation, an approach that is especially useful as preparation for
our later study of quantum computers. The circuit model is described in Section 3.1.2.
Although these models of computation appear different on the surface, it turns out that
they are equivalent. Why introduce more than one model of computation, you may ask?
We do so because different models of computation may yield different insights into the
solution of speciﬁc problems. Two (or more) ways of thinking about a concept are better
than one.
3.1.1
Turing machines
The basic elements of a Turing machine are illustrated in Figure 3.1. A Turing machine
contains four main elements: (a) a program, rather like an ordinary computer; (b) a ﬁnite
state control, which acts like a stripped-down microprocessor, co-ordinating the other
operations of the machine; (c) a tape, which acts like a computer memory; and (d) a read-
write tape-head, which points to the position on the tape which is currently readable or
writable. We now describe each of these four elements in more detail.
The ﬁnite state control for a Turing machine consists of a ﬁnite set of internal states,

===== PAGE 4 =====
Models for computation
123
!"#$"%&
'()(*+ ,*%*+
-#)*"#.
/%0+
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
3+%456"(*+
7+%4
Figure 3.1. Main elements of a Turing machine. In the text, blanks on the tape are denoted by a ‘b’. Note the ▷
marking the left hand end of the tape.
q1, . . . , qm. The number m is allowed to be varied; it turns out that for m sufﬁciently
large this does not affect the power of the machine in any essential way, so without loss
of generality we may suppose that m is some ﬁxed constant. The best way to think of
the ﬁnite state control is as a sort of microprocessor, co-ordinating the Turing machine’s
operation. It provides temporary storage off-tape, and a central place where all processing
for the machine may be done. In addition to the states q1, . . . , qm, there are also two special
internal states, labelled qs and qh. We call these the starting state and the halting state,
respectively. The idea is that at the beginning of the computation, the Turing machine
is in the starting state qs. The execution of the computation causes the Turing machine’s
internal state to change. If the computation ever ﬁnishes, the Turing machine ends up
in the state qh to indicate that the machine has completed its operation.
The Turing machine tape is a one-dimensional object, which stretches off to inﬁnity
in one direction. The tape consists of an inﬁnite sequence of tape squares. We number
the tape squares 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .. The tape squares each contain one symbol drawn from
some alphabet, !, which contains a ﬁnite number of distinct symbols. For now, it will
be convenient to assume that the alphabet contains four symbols, which we denote by
0, 1, b (the ‘blank’ symbol), and ▷, to mark the left hand edge of the tape. Initially, the
tape contains a ▷at the left hand end, a ﬁnite number of 0s and 1s, and the rest of the
tape contains blanks. The read-write tape-head identiﬁes a single square on the Turing
machine tape as the square that is currently being accessed by the machine.
Summarizing, the machine starts its operation with the ﬁnite state control in the state
qs, and with the read-write head at the leftmost tape square, the square numbered 0. The
computation then proceeds in a step by step manner according to the program, to be
deﬁned below. If the current state is qh, then the computation has halted, and the output
of the computation is the current (non-blank) contents of the tape.
A program for a Turing machine is a ﬁnite ordered list of program lines of the form
∝q, x, q′, x′, s∇. The ﬁrst item in the program line, q, is a state from the set of internal
states of the machine. The second item, x, is taken from the alphabet of symbols which
may appear on the tape, !. The way the program works is that on each machine cycle,
the Turing machine looks through the list of program lines in order, searching for a
line ∝q, x, ·, ·, ·∇, such that the current internal state of the machine is q, and the symbol

===== PAGE 5 =====
124
Introduction to computer science
being read on the tape is x. If it doesn’t ﬁnd such a program line, the internal state of the
machine is changed to qh, and the machine halts operation. If such a line is found, then
that program line is executed. Execution of a program line involves the following steps:
the internal state of the machine is changed to q′; the symbol x on the tape is overwritten
by the symbol x′, and the tape-head moves left, right, or stands still, depending on
whether s is −1, +1, or 0, respectively. The only exception to this rule is if the tape-head
is at the leftmost tape square, and s = −1, in which case the tape-head stays put.
Now that we know what a Turing machine is, let’s see how it may be used to compute
a simple function. Consider the following example of a Turing machine. The machine
starts with a binary number, x, on the tape, followed by blanks. The machine has three
internal states, q1, q2, and q3, in addition to the starting state qs and halting state qh. The
program contains the following program lines (the numbers on the left hand side are for
convenience in referring to the program lines in later discussion, and do not form part
of the program):
1 : ∝qs, ▷, q1, ▷, +1∇
2 : ∝q1, 0, q1, b, +1∇
3 : ∝q1, 1, q1, b, +1∇
4 : ∝q1, b, q2, b, −1∇
5 : ∝q2, b, q2, b, −1∇
6 : ∝q2, ▷, q3, ▷, +1∇
7 : ∝q3, b, qh, 1, 0∇.
What function does this program compute? Initially the machine is in the state qs and
at the left-most tape position so line 1, ∝qs, ▷, q1, ▷, +1∇, is executed, which causes the
tape-head to move right without changing what is written on the tape, but changing the
internal state of the machine to q1. The next three lines of the program ensure that while
the machine is in the state q1 the tape-head will continue moving right while it reads
either 0s (line 2) or 1s (line 3) on the tape, over-writing the tape contents with blanks as
it goes and remaining in the state q1, until it reaches a tape square that is already blank,
at which point the tape-head is moved one position to the left, and the internal state is
changed to q2 (line 4). Line 5 then ensures that the tape-head keeps moving left while
blanks are being read by the tape-head, without changing the contents of the tape. This
keeps up until the tape-head returns to its starting point, at which point it reads a ▷on
the tape, changes the internal state to q3, and moves one step to the right (line 6). Line
7 completes the program, simply printing the number 1 onto the tape, and then halting.
The preceding analysis shows that this program computes the constant function f(x) =
1. That is, regardless of what number is input on the tape the number 1 is output. More
generally, a Turing machine can be thought of as computing functions from the non-
negative integers to the non-negative integers; the initial state of the tape is used to
represent the input to the function, and the ﬁnal state of the tape is used to represent
the output of the function.
It seems as though we have gone to a very great deal of trouble to compute this
simple function using our Turing machines. Is it possible to build up more complicated
functions using Turing machines? For example, could we construct a machine such that
when two numbers, x and y, are input on the tape with a blank to demarcate them, it will

===== PAGE 6 =====
Models for computation
125
output the sum x + y on the tape? More generally, what class of functions is it possible
to compute using a Turing machine?
It turns out that the Turing machine model of computation can be used to compute an
enormous variety of functions. For example, it can be used to do all the basic arithmetical
operations, to search through text represented as strings of bits on the tape, and many
other interesting operations. Surprisingly, it turns out that a Turing machine can be
used to simulate all the operations performed on a modern computer! Indeed, according
to a thesis put forward independently by Church and by Turing, the Turing machine
model of computation completely captures the notion of computing a function using an
algorithm. This is known as the Church–Turing thesis:
The class of functions computable by a Turing machine corresponds exactly to
the class of functions which we would naturally regard as being computable by an
algorithm.
The Church–Turing thesis asserts an equivalence between a rigorous mathematical
concept – function computable by a Turing machine – and the intuitive concept of
what it means for a function to be computable by an algorithm. The thesis derives its
importance from the fact that it makes the study of real-world algorithms, prior to 1936
a rather vague concept, amenable to rigorous mathematical study. To understand the
signiﬁcance of this point it may be helpful to consider the deﬁnition of a continuous
function from real analysis. Every child can tell you what it means for a line to be
continuous on a piece of paper, but it is far from obvious how to capture that intuition in
a rigorous deﬁnition. Mathematicians in the nineteenth century spent a great deal of time
arguing about the merits of various deﬁnitions of continuity before the modern deﬁnition
of continuity came to be accepted. When making fundamental deﬁnitions like that of
continuity or of computability it is important that good deﬁnitions be chosen, ensuring
that one’s intuitive notions closely match the precise mathematical deﬁnition. From this
point of view the Church–Turing thesis is simply the assertion that the Turing machine
model of computation provides a good foundation for computer science, capturing the
intuitive notion of an algorithm in a rigorous deﬁnition.
A priori it is not obvious that every function which we would intuitively regard as
computable by an algorithm can be computed using a Turing machine. Church, Tur-
ing and many other people have spent a great deal of time gathering evidence for the
Church–Turing thesis, and in sixty years no evidence to the contrary has been found.
Nevertheless, it is possible that in the future we will discover in Nature a process which
computes a function not computable on a Turing machine. It would be wonderful if
that ever happened, because we could then harness that process to help us perform new
computations which could not be performed before. Of course, we would also need to
overhaul the deﬁnition of computability, and with it, computer science.
Exercise 3.1: (Non-computable processes in Nature)
How might we recognize
that a process in Nature computes a function not computable by a Turing
machine?
Exercise 3.2: (Turing numbers)
Show that single-tape Turing machines can each
be given a number from the list 1, 2, 3, . . . in such a way that the number
uniquely speciﬁes the corresponding machine. We call this number the Turing
number of the corresponding Turing machine. (Hint: Every positive integer has

===== PAGE 7 =====
126
Introduction to computer science
a unique prime factorization pa1
1 pa2
2 . . . pak
k , where pi are distinct prime numbers,
and a1, . . . , ak are non-negative integers.)
In later chapters, we will see that quantum computers also obey the Church–Turing
thesis. That is, quantum computers can compute the same class of functions as is com-
putable by a Turing machine. The difference between quantum computers and Turing
machines turns out to lie in the efﬁciency with which the computation of the function
may be performed – there are functions which can be computed much more efﬁciently
on a quantum computer than is believed to be possible with a classical computing device
such as a Turing machine.
Demonstrating in complete detail that the Turing machine model of computation can
be used to build up all the usual concepts used in computer programming languages is
beyond the scope of this book (see ‘History and further reading’ at the end of the chapter
for more information). When specifying algorithms, instead of explicitly specifying the
Turing machine used to compute the algorithm, we shall usually use a much higher level
pseudocode, trusting in the Church–Turing thesis that this pseudocode can be translated
into the Turing machine model of computation. We won’t give any sort of rigorous
deﬁnition for pseudocode. Think of it as a slightly more formal version of English or, if
you like, a sloppy version of a high-level programming language such as C++ or BASIC.
Pseudocode provides a convenient way of expressing algorithms, without going into the
extreme level of detail required by a Turing machine. An example use of pseudocode
may be found in Box 3.2 on page 130; it is also used later in the book to describe quantum
algorithms.
There are many variants on the basic Turing machine model. We might imagine
Turing machines with different kinds of tapes. For example, one could consider two-way
inﬁnite tapes, or perhaps computation with tapes of more than one dimension. So far
as is presently known, it is not possible to change any aspect of the Turing model in
a way that is physically reasonable, and which manages to extend the class of functions
computable by the model.
As an example consider a Turing machine equipped with multiple tapes. For simplicity
we consider the two-tape case, as the generalization to more than two tapes is clear from
this example. Like the basic Turing machine, a two-tape Turing machine has a ﬁnite
number of internal states q1, . . . , qm, a start state qs, and a halt state qh. It has two tapes,
each of which contain symbols from some ﬁnite alphabet of symbols, !. As before we
ﬁnd it convenient to assume that the alphabet contains four symbols, 0, 1, b and ▷, where
▷marks the left hand edge of each tape. The machine has two tape-heads, one for each
tape. The main difference between the two-tape Turing machine and the basic Turing
machine is in the program. Program lines are of the form ∝q, x1, x2, q′, x′
1, x′
2, s1, s2∇,
meaning that if the internal state of the machine is q, tape one is reading x1 at its current
position, and tape two is reading x2 at its current position, then the internal state of the
machine should be changed to q′, x1 overwritten with x′
1, x2 overwritten with x′
2, and
the tape-heads for tape one and tape two moved according to whether s1 or s2 are equal
to +1, −1 or 0, respectively.
In what sense are the basic Turing machine and the two-tape Turing machine equiv-
alent models of computation? They are equivalent in the sense that each computational
model is able to simulate the other. Suppose we have a two-tape Turing machine which
takes as input a bit string x on the ﬁrst tape and blanks on the remainder of both tapes,

===== PAGE 8 =====
Models for computation
127
except the endpoint marker ▷. This machine computes a function f(x), where f(x) is
deﬁned to be the contents of the ﬁrst tape after the Turing machine has halted. Rather
remarkably, it turns out that given a two-tape Turing machine to compute f, there exists
an equivalent single-tape Turing machine that is also able to compute f. We won’t ex-
plain how to do this explicitly, but the basic idea is that the single-tape Turing machine
simulates the two-tape Turing machine, using its single tape to store the contents of both
tapes of the two-tape Turing machine. There is some computational overhead required
to do this simulation, but the important point is that in principle it can always be done.
In fact, there exists a Universal Turing machine (see Box 3.1) which can simulate any
other Turing machine!
Another interesting variant of the Turing machine model is to introduce randomness
into the model. For example, imagine that the Turing machine can execute a program
line whose effect is the following: if the internal state is q and the tape-head reads x,
then ﬂip an unbiased coin. If the coin lands heads, change the internal state to qiH,
and if it lands tails, change the internal state to qiT, where qiH and qiT are two internal
states of the Turing machine. Such a program line can be represented as ∝q, x, qiH, qiT∇.
However, even this variant doesn’t change the essential power of the Turing machine
model of computation. It is not difﬁcult to see that we can simulate the effect of the above
algorithm on a deterministic Turing machine by explicitly ‘searching out’ all the possible
computational paths corresponding to different values of the coin tosses. Of course, this
deterministic simulation may be far less efﬁcient than the random model, but the key
point for the present discussion is that the class of functions computable is not changed
by introducing randomness into the underlying model.
Exercise 3.3: (Turing machine to reverse a bit string)
Describe a Turing
machine which takes a binary number x as input, and outputs the bits of x in
reverse order. (Hint: In this exercise and the next it may help to use a multi-tape
Turing machine and/or symbols other than ▷, 0, 1 and the blank.)
Exercise 3.4: (Turing machine to add modulo 2)
Describe a Turing machine to
add two binary numbers x and y modulo 2. The numbers are input on the
Turing machine tape in binary, in the form x, followed by a single blank,
followed by a y. If one number is not as long as the other then you may assume
that it has been padded with leading 0s to make the two numbers the same
length.
Let us return to Hilbert’s entscheidungsproblem, the original inspiration for the
founders of computer science. Is there an algorithm to decide all the problems of math-
ematics? The answer to this question was shown by Church and Turing to be no. In
Box 3.2, we explain Turing’s proof of this remarkable fact. This phenomenon of unde-
cidability is now known to extend far beyond the examples which Church and Turing
constructed. For example, it is known that the problem of deciding whether two topo-
logical spaces are topologically equivalent (‘homeomorphic’) is undecidable. There are
simple problems related to the behavior of dynamical systems which are undecidable, as
you will show in Problem 3.4. References for these and other examples are given in the
end of chapter ‘History and further reading’.
Besides its intrinsic interest, undecidability foreshadows a topic of great concern in
computer science, and also to quantum computation and quantum information: the dis-

===== PAGE 9 =====
128
Introduction to computer science
Box 3.1: The Universal Turing Machine
We’ve described Turing machines as containing three elements which may vary
from machine to machine – the initial conﬁguration of the tape, the internal states
of the ﬁnite state control, and the program for the machine. A clever idea known
as the Universal Turing Machine (UTM) allows us to ﬁx the program and ﬁnite
state control once and for all, leaving the initial contents of the tape as the only part
of the machine which needs to be varied.
The Universal Turing Machine (see the ﬁgure below) has the following property.
Let M be any Turing machine, and let TM be the Turing number associated to
machine M. Then on input of the binary representation for TM followed by a blank,
followed by any string of symbols x on the remainder of the tape, the Universal
Turing Machine gives as output whatever machine M would have on input of x.
Thus, the Universal Turing Machine is capable of simulating any other Turing
machine!
8/9
/9
:
!
8/9
9;!<
-#&0=*+
The Universal Turing Machine is similar in spirit to a modern programmable
computer, in which the action to be taken by the computer – the ‘program’ – is
stored in memory, analogous to the bit string TM stored at the beginning of the
tape by the Universal Turing Machine. The data to be processed by the program
is stored in a separate part of memory, analogous to the role of x in the Universal
Turing Machine. Then some ﬁxed hardware is used to run the program, producing
the output. This ﬁxed hardware is analogous to the internal states and the (ﬁxed)
program being executed by the Universal Turing Machine.
Describing the detailed construction of a Universal Turing Machine is beyond the
scope of this book. (Though industrious readers may like to attempt the construc-
tion.) The key point is the existence of such a machine, showing that a single ﬁxed
machine can be used to run any algorithm whatsoever. The existence of a Univer-
sal Turing Machine also explains our earlier statement that the number of internal
states in a Turing machine does not matter much, for provided that number m
exceeds the number needed for a Universal Turing Machine, such a machine can
be used to simulate a Turing machine with any number of internal states.
tinction between problems which are easy to solve, and problems which are hard to solve.
Undecidability provides the ultimate example of problems which are hard to solve – so
hard that they are in fact impossible to solve.
Exercise 3.5: (Halting problem with no inputs)
Show that given a Turing

===== PAGE 10 =====
Models for computation
129
machine M there is no algorithm to determine whether M halts when the input
to the machine is a blank tape.
Exercise 3.6: (Probabilistic halting problem)
Suppose we number the
probabilistic Turing machines using a scheme similar to that found in
Exercise 3.2 and deﬁne the probabilistic halting function hp(x) to be 1 if
machine x halts on input of x with probability at least 1/2 and 0 if machine x
halts on input of x with probability less than 1/2. Show that there is no
probabilistic Turing machine which can output hp(x) with probability of
correctness strictly greater than 1/2 for all x.
Exercise 3.7: (Halting oracle)
Suppose a black box is made available to us which
takes a non-negative integer x as input, and then outputs the value of h(x),
where h(·) is the halting function deﬁned in Box 3.2 on page 130. This type of
black box is sometimes known as an oracle for the halting problem. Suppose we
have a regular Turing machine which is augmented by the power to call the
oracle. One way of accomplishing this is to use a two-tape Turing machine, and
add an extra program instruction to the Turing machine which results in the
oracle being called, and the value of h(x) being printed on the second tape,
where x is the current contents of the second tape. It is clear that this model for
computation is more powerful than the conventional Turing machine model,
since it can be used to compute the halting function. Is the halting problem for
this model of computation undecidable? That is, can a Turing machine aided by
an oracle for the halting problem decide whether a program for the Turing
machine with oracle will halt on a particular input?
3.1.2
Circuits
Turing machines are rather idealized models of computing devices. Real computers are
ﬁnite in size, whereas for Turing machines we assumed a computer of unbounded size.
In this section we investigate an alternative model of computation, the circuit model, that
is equivalent to the Turing machine in terms of computational power, but is more conve-
nient and realistic for many applications. In particular the circuit model of computation
is especially important as preparation for our investigation of quantum computers.
A circuit is made up of wires and gates, which carry information around, and perform
simple computational tasks, respectively. For example, Figure 3.2 shows a simple circuit
which takes as input a single bit, a. This bit is passed through a
gate, which ﬂips
the bit, taking 1 to 0 and 0 to 1. The wires before and after the
gate serve merely to
carry the bit to and from the
gate; they can represent movement of the bit through
space, or perhaps just through time.
More generally, a circuit may involve many input and output bits, many wires, and
many logical gates. A logic gate is a function f : {0, 1}k ◦{0, 1}l from some ﬁxed
number k of input bits to some ﬁxed number l of output bits. For example, the
gate
is a gate with one input bit and one output bit which computes the function f(a) = 1≺a,
where a is a single bit, and ≺is modulo 2 addition. It is also usual to make the convention
that no loops are allowed in the circuit, to avoid possible instabilities, as illustrated in
Figure 3.3. We say such a circuit is acyclic, and we adhere to the convention that circuits
in the circuit model of computation be acyclic.

===== PAGE 11 =====
130
Introduction to computer science
Box 3.2: The halting problem
In Exercise 3.2 you showed that each Turing machine can be uniquely associated
with a number from the list 1, 2, 3, . . .. To solve Hilbert’s problem, Turing used this
numbering to pose the halting problem: does the machine with Turing number x
halt upon input of the number y? This is a well posed and interesting mathematical
problem. After all, it is a matter of some considerable interest to us whether our
algorithms halt or not. Yet it turns out that there is no algorithm which is capable of
solving the halting problem. To see this, Turing asked whether there is an algorithm
to solve an even more specialized problem: does the machine with Turing number
x halt upon input of the same number x? Turing deﬁned the halting function,
h(x) ↔
! 0
if machine number x does not halt upon input of x
1
if machine number x halts upon input of x.
If there is an algorithm to solve the halting problem, then there surely is an al-
gorithm to evaluate h(x). We will try to reach a contradiction by supposing such
an algorithm exists, denoted by HALT(x). Consider an algorithm computing the
function TURING(x), with pseudocode
TURING(x)
y = HALT(x)
if y = 0 then
halt
else
loop forever
end if
Since HALT is a valid program, TURING must also be a valid program, with
some Turing number, t. By deﬁnition of the halting function, h(t) = 1 if and only
if TURING halts on input of t. But by inspection of the program for TURING,
we see that TURING halts on input of t if and only if h(t) = 0. Thus h(t) = 1 if
and only if h(t) = 0, a contradiction. Therefore, our initial assumption that there
is an algorithm to evaluate h(x) must have been wrong. We conclude that there is
no algorithm allowing us to solve the halting problem.
!
!
Figure 3.2. Elementary circuit performing a single
gate on a single input bit.
There are many other elementary logic gates which are useful for computation. A
partial list includes the
gate, the
gate, the
gate, the
gate, and the
gate. Each of these gates takes two bits as input, and produces a single bit as output.
The
gate outputs 1 if and only if both of its inputs are 1. The
gate outputs 1 if

===== PAGE 12 =====
Models for computation
131
Figure 3.3. Circuits containing cycles can be unstable, and are not usually permitted in the circuit model of
computation.
and only if at least one of its inputs is 1. The
gate outputs the sum, modulo 2, of
its inputs. The
and
gates take the
and
, respectively, of their inputs,
and then apply a
to whatever is output. The action of these gates is illustrated in
Figure 3.4.
>
!
"
! !"# "
!
"
! $!% "
!
"
! &"# "
!
"
! "# "
!
"
>
! !$!% "
!
!"' !
;%<
;:<
;?<
;4<
;+<
;@<
Figure 3.4. Elementary circuits performing the
,
,
,
, and
gates.
There are two important ‘gates’ missing from Figure 3.4, namely the
gate and
the
gate. In circuits we often allow bits to ‘divide’, replacing a bit with two
copies of itself, an operation referred to as
. We also allow bits to
,
that is, the value of two bits are interchanged. A third operation missing from Figure 3.4,
not really a logic gate at all, is to allow the preparation of extra ancilla or work bits, to
allow extra working space during the computation.
These simple circuit elements can be put together to perform an enormous variety of
computations. Below we’ll show that these elements can be used to compute any function
whatsoever. In the meantime, let’s look at a simple example of a circuit which adds two
n bit integers, using essentially the same algorithm taught to school-children around the

===== PAGE 13 =====
132
Introduction to computer science
world. The basic element in this circuit is a smaller circuit known as a half-adder, shown
in Figure 3.5. A half-adder takes two bits, x and y, as input, and outputs the sum of
the bits x ≺y modulo 2, together with a carry bit set to 1 if x and y are both 1, or 0
otherwise.
#
$
%
# ! %
Figure 3.5. Half-adder circuit. The carry bit c is set to 1 when x and y are both 1, otherwise it is 0.
Two cascaded half-adders may be used to build a full-adder, as shown in Figure 3.6.
A full-adder takes as input three bits, x, y, and c. The bits x and y should be thought
of as data to be added, while c is a carry bit from an earlier computation. The circuit
outputs two bits. One output bit is the modulo 2 sum, x ≺y ≺c of all three input bits.
The second output bit, c′, is a carry bit, which is set to 1 if two or more of the inputs is
1, and is 0 otherwise.
#
%
$
7A
7A
# !% !$
$&
Figure 3.6. Full-adder circuit.
By cascading many of these full-adders together we obtain a circuit to add two n-bit
integers, as illustrated in Figure 3.7 for the case n = 3.
#'%'#(%(#)%)
'A
'A
7A
Figure 3.7. Addition circuit for two three-bit integers, x = x2x1x0 and y = y2y1y0, using the elementary
algorithm taught to school-children.
We claimed earlier that just a few ﬁxed gates can be used to compute any function
f : {0, 1}n ◦{0, 1}m whatsoever. We will now prove this for the simpliﬁed case of a
function f : {0, 1}n ◦{0, 1} with n input bits and a single output bit. Such a function

===== PAGE 14 =====
Models for computation
133
is known as a Boolean function, and the corresponding circuit is a Boolean circuit. The
general universality proof follows immediately from the special case of Boolean functions.
The proof is by induction on n. For n = 1 there are four possible functions: the identity,
which has a circuit consisting of a single wire; the bit ﬂip, which is implemented using
a single
gate; the function which replaces the input bit with a 0, which can be
obtained by
ing the input with a work bit initially in the 0 state; and the function
which replaces the input with a 1, which can be obtained by
ing the input with a work
bit initially in the 1 state.
To complete the induction, suppose that any function on n bits may be computed
by a circuit, and let f be a function on n + 1 bits. Deﬁne n-bit functions f0 and f1
by f0(x1, . . . , xn) ↔f(0, x1, . . . , xn) and f1(x1, . . . , xn) ↔f(1, x1, . . . , xn). These are
both n-bit functions, so by the inductive hypothesis there are circuits to compute these
functions.
It is now an easy matter to design a circuit which computes f. The circuit computes
both f0 and f1 on the last n bits of the input. Then, depending on whether the ﬁrst bit of
the input was a 0 or a 1 it outputs the appropriate answer. A circuit to do this is shown
in Figure 3.8. This completes the induction.
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
BC/
ABD
ABD
EC3
Figure 3.8. Circuit to compute an arbitrary function f on n + 1 bits, assuming by induction that there are circuits
to compute the n-bit functions f0 and f1.
Five elements may be identiﬁed in the universal circuit construction: (1) wires, which
preserve the states of the bits; (2) ancilla bits prepared in standard states, used in the
n = 1 case of the proof; (3) the
operation, which takes a single bit as input
and outputs two copies of that bit; (4) the
operation, which interchanges
the value of two bits; and (5) the
,
, and
gates. In Chapter 4 we’ll deﬁne
the quantum circuit model of computation in a manner analogous to classical circuits. It
is interesting to note that many of these ﬁve elements pose some interesting challenges
when extending to the quantum case: it is not necessarily obvious that good quantum
wires for the preservation of qubits can be constructed, even in principle, the

===== PAGE 15 =====
134
Introduction to computer science
operation cannot be performed in a straightforward manner in quantum mechanics, due
to the no-cloning theorem (as explained in Section 1.3.5), and the
and
gates
are not invertible, and thus can’t be implemented in a straightforward manner as unitary
quantum gates. There is certainly plenty to think about in deﬁning a quantum circuit
model of computation!
Exercise 3.8: (Universality of
)
Show that the
gate can be used to
simulate the
,
and
gates, provided wires, ancilla bits and
are available.
Let’s return from our brief quantum digression, to the properties of classical circuits.
We claimed earlier that the Turing machine model is equivalent to the circuit model of
computation. In what sense do we mean the two models are equivalent? On the face of
it, the two models appear quite different. The unbounded nature of a Turing machine
makes them more useful for abstractly specifying what it is we mean by an algorithm,
while circuits more closely capture what an actual physical computer does.
The two models are connected by introducing the notion of a uniform circuit family.
A circuit family consists of a collection of circuits, {Cn}, indexed by a positive integer
n. The circuit Cn has n input bits, and may have any ﬁnite number of extra work bits,
and output bits. The output of the circuit Cn, upon input of a number x of at most n
bits in length, is denoted by Cn(x). We require that the circuits be consistent, that is, if
m < n and x is at most m bits in length, then Cm(x) = Cn(x). The function computed
by the circuit family {Cn} is the function C(·) such that if x is n bits in length then
C(x) = Cn(x). For example, consider a circuit Cn that squares an n-bit number. This
deﬁnes a family of circuits {Cn} that computes the function, C(x) = x2, where x is any
positive integer.
It’s not enough to consider unrestricted families of circuits, however. In practice, we
need an algorithm to build the circuit. Indeed, if we don’t place any restrictions on the
circuit family then it becomes possible to compute all sorts of functions which we do
not expect to be able to compute in a reasonable model of computation. For example, let
hn(x) denote the halting function, restricted to values of x which are n bits in length.
Thus hn is a function from n bits to 1 bit, and we have proved there exists a circuit
Cn to compute hn(·). Therefore the circuit family {Cn} computes the halting function!
However, what prevents us from using this circuit family to solve the halting problem is
that we haven’t speciﬁed an algorithm which will allow us to build the circuit Cn for all
values of n. Adding this requirement results in the notion of a uniform circuit family.
That is, a family of circuits {Cn} is said to be a uniform circuit family if there is some
algorithm running on a Turing machine which, upon input of n, generates a description
of Cn. That is, the algorithm outputs a description of what gates are in the circuit Cn,
how those gates are connected together to form a circuit, any ancilla bits needed by
the circuit,
and
operations, and where the output from the circuit
should be read out. For example, the family of circuits we described earlier for squaring
n-bit numbers is certainly a uniform circuit family, since there is an algorithm which,
given n, outputs a description of the circuit needed to square an n-bit number. You can
think of this algorithm as the means by which an engineer is able to generate a description
of (and thus build) the circuit for any n whatsoever. By contrast, a circuit family that is
not uniform is said to be a non-uniform circuit family. There is no algorithm to construct

===== PAGE 16 =====
The analysis of computational problems
135
the circuit for arbitrary n, which prevents our engineer from building circuits to compute
functions like the halting function.
Intuitively, a uniform circuit family is a family of circuits that can be generated by some
reasonable algorithm. It can be shown that the class of functions computable by uniform
circuit families is exactly the same as the class of functions which can be computed on a
Turing machine. With this uniformity restriction, results in the Turing machine model
of computation can usually be given a straightforward translation into the circuit model
of computation, and vice versa. Later we give similar attention to issues of uniformity in
the quantum circuit model of computation.
3.2
The analysis of computational problems
The analysis of computational problems depends upon the answer to three fundamental
questions:
(1) What is a computational problem? Multiplying two numbers together is a
computational problem; so is programming a computer to exceed human abilities in
the writing of poetry. In order to make progress developing a general theory for the
analysis of computational problems we are going to isolate a special class of
problems known as decision problems, and concentrate our analysis on those.
Restricting ourselves in this way enables the development of a theory which is both
elegant and rich in structure. Most important, it is a theory whose principles have
application far beyond decision problems.
(2) How may we design algorithms to solve a given computational problem?
Once a problem has been speciﬁed, what algorithms can be used to solve the
problem? Are there general techniques which can be used to solve wide classes of
problems? How can we be sure an algorithm behaves as claimed?
(3) What are the minimal resources required to solve a given computational
problem? Running an algorithm requires the consumption of resources, such as
time, space, and energy. In different situations it may be desirable to minimize
consumption of one or more resource. Can we classify problems according to the
resource requirements needed to solve them?
In the next few sections we investigate these three questions, especially questions 1
and 3. Although question 1, ‘what is a computational problem?’, is perhaps the most
fundamental of the questions, we shall defer answering it until Section 3.2.3, pausing ﬁrst
to establish some background notions related to resource quantiﬁcation in Section 3.2.1,
and then reviewing the key ideas of computational complexity in Section 3.2.2.
Question 2, how to design good algorithms, is the subject of an enormous amount of
ingenious work by many researchers. So much so that in this brief introduction we cannot
even begin to describe the main ideas employed in the design of good algorithms. If you
are interested in this beautiful subject, we refer you to the end of chapter ‘History and
further reading’. Our closest direct contact with this subject will occur later in the book,
when we study quantum algorithms. The techniques involved in the creation of quantum
algorithms have typically involved a blend of deep existing ideas in algorithm design for
classical computers, and the creation of new, wholly quantum mechanical techniques for
algorithm design. For this reason, and because the spirit of quantum algorithm design

===== PAGE 17 =====
136
Introduction to computer science
is so similar in many ways to classical algorithm design, we encourage you to become
familiar with at least the basic ideas of algorithm design.
Question 3, what are the minimal resources required to solve a given computational
problem, is the main focus of the next few sections. For example, suppose we are given
two numbers, each n bits in length, which we wish to multiply. If the multiplication
is performed on a single-tape Turing machine, how many computational steps must be
executed by the Turing machine in order to complete the task? How much space is used
on the Turing machine while completing the task?
These are examples of the type of resource questions we may ask. Generally speak-
ing, computers make use of many different kinds of resources, however we will focus
most of our attention on time, space, and energy. Traditionally in computer science, time
and space have been the two major resource concerns in the study of algorithms, and
we study these issues in Sections 3.2.2 through 3.2.4. Energy has been a less impor-
tant consideration; however, the study of energy requirements motivates the subject of
reversible classical computation, which in turn is a prerequisite for quantum computa-
tion, so we examine energy requirements for computation in some considerable detail in
Section 3.2.5.
3.2.1
How to quantify computational resources
Different models of computation lead to different resource requirements for computa-
tion. Even something as simple as changing from a single-tape to a two-tape Turing
machine may change the resources required to solve a given computational problem. For
a computational task which is extremely well understood, like addition of integers, for
example, such differences between computational models may be of interest. However,
for a ﬁrst pass at understanding a problem, we would like a way of quantifying resource
requirements that is independent of relatively trivial changes in the computational model.
One of the tools which has been developed to do this is the asymptotic notation, which
can be used to summarize the essential behavior of a function. This asymptotic notation
can be used, for example, to summarize the essence of how many time steps it takes a
given algorithm to run, without worrying too much about the exact time count. In this
section we describe this notation in detail, and apply it to a simple problem illustrating
the quantiﬁcation of computational resources – the analysis of algorithms for sorting a
list of names into alphabetical order.
Suppose, for example, that we are interested in the number of gates necessary to add
together two n-bit numbers. Exact counts of the number of gates required obscure the
big picture: perhaps a speciﬁc algorithm requires 24n + 2∼log n⊂+ 16 gates to perform
this task. However, in the limit of large problem size the only term which matters is the
24n term. Furthermore, we disregard constant factors as being of secondary importance
to the analysis of the algorithm. The essential behavior of the algorithm is summed up
by saying that the number of operations required scales like n, where n is the number of
bits in the numbers being added. The asymptotic notation consists of three tools which
make this notion precise.
The O (‘big O’) notation is used to set upper bounds on the behavior of a function.
Suppose f(n) and g(n) are two functions on the non-negative integers. We say ‘f(n) is
in the class of functions O(g(n))’, or just ‘f(n) is O(g(n))’, if there are constants c and
n0 such that for all values of n greater than n0, f(n) ⇒cg(n). That is, for sufﬁciently
large n, the function g(n) is an upper bound on f(n), up to an unimportant constant

===== PAGE 18 =====
The analysis of computational problems
137
factor. The big O notation is particularly useful for studying the worst-case behavior of
speciﬁc algorithms, where we are often satisﬁed with an upper bound on the resources
consumed by an algorithm.
When studying the behaviors of a class of algorithms – say the entire class of algorithms
which can be used to multiply two numbers – it is interesting to set lower bounds on
the resources required. For this the Ω(‘big Omega’) notation is used. A function f(n)
is said to be Ω(g(n)) if there exist constants c and n0 such that for all n greater than n0,
cg(n) ⇒f(n). That is, for sufﬁciently large n, g(n) is a lower bound on f(n), up to an
unimportant constant factor.
Finally, the Θ (‘big Theta’) notation is used to indicate that f(n) behaves the same as
g(n) asymptotically, up to unimportant constant factors. That is, we say f(n) is Θ(g(n))
if it is both O(g(n)) and Ω(g(n)).
Asymptotic notation: examples
Let’s consider a few simple examples of the asymptotic notation. The function 2n is
in the class O(n2), since 2n ⇒2n2 for all positive n. The function 2n is Ω(n3), since
n3 ⇒2n for sufﬁciently large n. Finally, the function 7n2 + ∩n log(n) is Θ(n2), since
7n2 ⇒7n2 + ∩n log(n) ⇒8n2 for all sufﬁciently large values of n. In the following
few exercises you will work through some of the elementary properties of the asymptotic
notation that make it a useful tool in the analysis of algorithms.
Exercise 3.9:
Prove that f(n) is O(g(n)) if and only if g(n) is Ω(f(n)). Deduce that
f(n) is Θ(g(n)) if and only if g(n) is Θ(f(n)).
Exercise 3.10:
Suppose g(n) is a polynomial of degree k. Show that g(n) is O(nl) for
any l ⊇k.
Exercise 3.11:
Show that log n is O(nk) for any k > 0.
Exercise 3.12: (nlog n is super-polynomial)
Show that nk is O(nlog n) for any k, but
that nlog n is never O(nk).
Exercise 3.13: (nlog n is sub-exponential)
Show that cn is Ω(nlog n) for any c > 1,
but that nlog n is never Ω(cn).
Exercise 3.14:
Suppose e(n) is O(f(n)) and g(n) is O(h(n)). Show that e(n)g(n) is
O(f(n)h(n)).
An example of the use of the asymptotic notation in quantifying resources is the
following simple application to the problem of sorting an n element list of names into
alphabetical order. Many sorting algorithms are based upon the ‘compare-and-swap’
operation: two elements of an n element list are compared, and swapped if they are in
the wrong order. If this compare-and-swap operation is the only means by which we can
access the list, how many such operations are required in order to ensure that the list has
been correctly sorted?
A simple compare-and-swap algorithm for solving the sorting problem is as follows:
(note that compare-and-swap(j,k) compares the list entries numbered j and k, and
swaps them if they are out of order)

===== PAGE 19 =====
138
Introduction to computer science
for j = 1 to n-1
for k = j+1 to n
compare-and-swap(j,k)
end k
end j
It is clear that this algorithm correctly sorts a list of n names into alphabetical order.
Note that the number of compare-and-swap operations executed by the algorithm is
(n −1) + (n −2) + · · · + 1 = n(n −1)/2. Thus the number of compare-and-swap
operations used by the algorithm is Θ(n2). Can we do better than this? It turns out that we
can. Algorithms such as ‘heapsort’ are known which run using O(n log n) compare-and-
swap operations. Furthermore, in Exercise 3.15 you’ll work through a simple counting
argument that shows any algorithm based upon the compare-and-swap operation requires
Ω(n log n) such operations. Thus, the sorting problem requires Θ(n log n) compare-and-
swap operations, in general.
Exercise 3.15: (Lower bound for compare-and-swap based sorts)
Suppose an n
element list is sorted by applying some sequence of compare-and-swap
operations to the list. There are n! possible initial orderings of the list. Show that
after k of the compare-and-swap operations have been applied, at most 2k of the
possible initial orderings will have been sorted into the correct order. Conclude
that Ω(n log n) compare-and-swap operations are required to sort all possible
initial orderings into the correct order.
3.2.2
Computational complexity
The idea that there won’t be an algorithm to solve it – this is something fun-
damental that won’t ever change – that idea appeals to me.
– Stephen Cook
Sometimes it is good that some things are impossible. I am happy there are
many things that nobody can do to me.
– Leonid Levin
It should not come as a surprise that our choice of polynomial algorithms as
the mathematical concept that is supposed to capture the informal notion of
‘practically efﬁcient computation’ is open to criticism from all sides. [. . . ] Ul-
timately, our argument for our choice must be this: Adopting polynomial
worst-case performance as our criterion of efﬁciency results in an
elegant and useful theory that says something meaningful about
practical computation, and would be impossible without this sim-
pliﬁcation.
– Christos Papadimitriou
What time and space resources are required to perform a computation? In many cases
these are the most important questions we can ask about a computational problem. Prob-
lems like addition and multiplication of numbers are regarded as efﬁciently solvable
because we have fast algorithms to perform addition and multiplication, which consume

===== PAGE 20 =====
The analysis of computational problems
139
little space when running. Many other problems have no known fast algorithm, and are
effectively impossible to solve, not because we can’t ﬁnd an algorithm to solve the prob-
lem, but because all known algorithms consume such vast quantities of space or time as
to render them practically useless.
Computational complexity is the study of the time and space resources required to
solve computational problems. The task of computational complexity is to prove lower
bounds on the resources required by the best possible algorithm for solving a problem,
even if that algorithm is not explicitly known. In this and the next two sections, we
give an overview of computational complexity, its major concepts, and some of the more
important results of the ﬁeld. Note that computational complexity is in a sense comple-
mentary to the ﬁeld of algorithm design; ideally, the most efﬁcient algorithms we could
design would match perfectly with the lower bounds proved by computational complex-
ity. Unfortunately, this is often not the case. As already noted, in this book we won’t
examine classical algorithm design in any depth.
One difﬁculty in formulating a theory of computational complexity is that different
computational models may require different resources to solve the same problem. For in-
stance, multiple-tape Turing machines can solve many problems substantially faster than
single-tape Turing machines. This difﬁculty is resolved in a rather coarse way. Suppose
a problem is speciﬁed by giving n bits as input. For instance, we might be interested in
whether a particular n-bit number is prime or not. The chief distinction made in com-
putational complexity is between problems which can be solved using resources which
are bounded by a polynomial in n, or which require resources which grow faster than
any polynomial in n. In the latter case we usually say that the resources required are
exponential in the problem size, abusing the term exponential, since there are functions
like nlog n which grow faster than any polynomial (and thus are ‘exponential’ accord-
ing to this convention), yet which grow slower than any true exponential. A problem
is regarded as easy, tractable or feasible if an algorithm for solving the problem using
polynomial resources exists, and as hard, intractable or infeasible if the best possible
algorithm requires exponential resources.
As a simple example, suppose we have two numbers with binary expansions x1 . . . xm1
and y1 . . . ym2, and we wish to determine the sum of the two numbers. The total size of
the input is n ↔m1 + m2. It’s easy to see that the two numbers can be added using a
number of elementary operations that scales as Θ(n); this algorithm uses a polynomial
(indeed, linear) number of operations to perform its tasks. By contrast, it is believed
(though it has never been proved!) that the problem of factoring an integer into its prime
factors is intractable. That is, the belief is that there is no algorithm which can factor
an arbitrary n-bit integer using O(p(n)) operations, where p is some ﬁxed polynomial
function of n. We will later give many other examples of problems which are believed to
be intractable in this sense.
The polynomial versus exponential classiﬁcation is rather coarse. In practice, an algo-
rithm that solves a problem using 2n/1000 operations is probably more useful than one
which runs in n1000 operations. Only for very large input sizes (n ≈108) will the ‘efﬁ-
cient’ polynomial algorithm be preferable to the ‘inefﬁcient’ exponential algorithm, and
for many purposes it may be more practical to prefer the ‘inefﬁcient’ algorithm.
Nevertheless, there are many reasons to base computational complexity primarily on
the polynomial versus exponential classiﬁcation. First, historically, with few exceptions,
polynomial resource algorithms have been much faster than exponential algorithms. We

===== PAGE 21 =====
140
Introduction to computer science
might speculate that the reason for this is lack of imagination: coming up with algorithms
requiring n, n2 or some other low degree polynomial number of operations is often much
easier than ﬁnding a natural algorithm which requires n1000 operations, although examples
like the latter do exist. Thus, the predisposition for the human mind to come up with
relatively simple algorithms has meant that in practice polynomial algorithms usually do
perform much more efﬁciently than their exponential cousins.
A second and more fundamental reason for emphasizing the polynomial versus expo-
nential classiﬁcation is derived from the strong Church–Turing thesis. As discussed in
Section 1.1, it was observed in the 1960s and 1970s that probabilistic Turing machines
appear to be the strongest ‘reasonable’ model of computation. More precisely, researchers
consistently found that if it was possible to compute a function using k elementary opera-
tions in some model that was not the probabilistic Turing machine model of computation,
then it was always possible to compute the same function in the probabilistic Turing ma-
chine model, using at most p(k) elementary operations, where p(·) is some polynomial
function. This statement is known as the strong Church–Turing thesis:
Strong Church–Turing thesis: Any model of computation can be simulated
on a probabilistic Turing machine with at most a polynomial increase in the
number of elementary operations required.
The strong Church–Turing thesis is great news for the theory of computational complex-
ity, for it implies that attention may be restricted to the probabilistic Turing machine
model of computation. After all, if a problem has no polynomial resource solution on
a probabilistic Turing machine, then the strong Church–Turing thesis implies that it
has no efﬁcient solution on any computing device. Thus, the strong Church–Turing
thesis implies that the entire theory of computational complexity will take on an ele-
gant, model-independent form if the notion of efﬁciency is identiﬁed with polynomial
resource algorithms, and this elegance has provided a strong impetus towards acceptance
of the identiﬁcation of ‘solvable with polynomial resources’ and ‘efﬁciently solvable’. Of
course, one of the prime reasons for interest in quantum computers is that they cast
into doubt the strong Church–Turing thesis, by enabling the efﬁcient solution of a prob-
lem which is believed to be intractable on all classical computers, including probabilistic
Turing machines! Nevertheless, it is useful to understand and appreciate the role the
strong Church–Turing thesis has played in the search for a model-independent theory
of computational complexity.
Finally, we note that, in practice, computer scientists are not only interested in the
polynomial versus exponential classiﬁcation of problems. This is merely the ﬁrst and
coarsest way of understanding how difﬁcult a computational problem is. However, it
is an exceptionally important distinction, and illustrates many broader points about the
nature of resource questions in computer science. For most of this book, it will be our
central concern in evaluating the efﬁciency of a given algorithm.
Having examined the merits of the polynomial versus exponential classiﬁcation, we
now have to confess that the theory of computational complexity has one remarkable
outstanding failure: it seems very hard to prove that there are interesting classes of prob-
lems which require exponential resources to solve. It is quite easy to give non-constructive
proofs that most problems require exponential resources (see Exercise 3.16, below), and
furthermore many interesting problems are conjectured to require exponential resources
for their solution, but rigorous proofs seem very hard to come by, at least with the present

===== PAGE 22 =====
The analysis of computational problems
141
state of knowledge. This failure of computational complexity has important implications
for quantum computation, because it turns out that the computational power of quantum
computers can be related to some major open problems in classical computational com-
plexity theory. Until these problems are resolved, it cannot be stated with certainty how
computationally powerful a quantum computer is, or even whether it is more powerful
than a classical computer!
Exercise 3.16: (Hard-to-compute functions exist)
Show that there exist Boolean
functions on n inputs which require at least 2n/ log n logic gates to compute.
3.2.3
Decision problems and the complexity classes P and NP
Many computational problems are most cleanly formulated as decision problems – prob-
lems with a yes or no answer. For example, is a given number m a prime number or not?
This is the primality decision problem. The main ideas of computational complexity are
most easily and most often formulated in terms of decision problems, for two reasons:
the theory takes its simplest and most elegant form in this form, while still generalizing
in a natural way to more complex scenarios; and historically computational complexity
arose primarily from the study of decision problems.
Although most decision problems can easily be stated in simple, familiar language,
discussion of the general properties of decision problems is greatly helped by the termi-
nology of formal languages. In this terminology, a language L over the alphabet Σ is a
subset of the set Σ∗of all (ﬁnite) strings of symbols from Σ. For example, if Σ = {0, 1},
then the set of binary representations of even numbers, L = {0, 10, 100, 110, . . .} is a
language over Σ.
Decision problems may be encoded in an obvious way as problems about languages.
For instance, the primality decision problem can be encoded using the binary alphabet
Σ = {0, 1}. Strings from Σ∗can be interpreted in a natural way as non-negative integers.
For example, 0010 can be interpreted as the number 2. The language L is deﬁned to
consist of all binary strings such that the corresponding number is prime.
To solve the primality decision problem, what we would like is a Turing machine
which, when started with a given number n on its input tape, eventually outputs some
equivalent of ‘yes’ if n is prime, and outputs ‘no’ if n is not prime. To make this idea
precise, it is convenient to modify our old Turing machine deﬁnition (of Section 3.1.1)
slightly, replacing the halting state qh with two states qY and qN to represent the answers
‘yes’ and ‘no’ respectively. In all other ways the machine behaves in the same way, and
it still halts when it enters the state qY or qN. More generally, a language L is decided
by a Turing machine if the machine is able to decide whether an input x on its tape is
a member of the language of L or not, eventually halting in the state qY if x ∈L, and
eventually halting in the state qN if x ̸∈L. We say that the machine has accepted or
rejected x depending on which of these two cases comes about.
How quickly can we determine whether or not a number is prime? That is, what is the
fastest Turing machine which decides the language representing the primality decision
problem? We say that a problem is in TIME(f(n)) if there exists a Turing machine
which decides whether a candidate x is in the language in time O(f(n)), where n is the
length of x. A problem is said to be solvable in polynomial time if it is in TIME(nk)
for some ﬁnite k. The collection of all languages which are in TIME(nk), for some k,
is denoted P. P is our ﬁrst example of a complexity class. More generally, a complexity

===== PAGE 23 =====
142
Introduction to computer science
class is deﬁned to be a collection of languages. Much of computational complexity theory
is concerned with the deﬁnition of various complexity classes, and understanding the
relationship between different complexity classes.
Not surprisingly, there are problems which cannot be solved in polynomial time.
Unfortunately, proving that any given problem can’t be solved in polynomial time seems
to be very difﬁcult, although conjectures abound! A simple example of an interesting
decision problem which is believed not to be in P is the factoring decision problem:
: Given a composite integer m and l < m, does m have a non-trivial
factor less than l?
An interesting property of factoring is that if somebody claims that the answer is ‘yes,
m does have a non-trivial factor less than l’ then they can establish this by exhibiting
such a factor, which can then be efﬁciently checked by other parties, simply by doing
long-division. We call such a factor a witness to the fact that m has a factor less than l.
This idea of an easily checkable witness is the key idea in the deﬁnition of the complexity
class NP, below. We have phrased factoring as a decision problem, but you can easily
verify that the decision problem is equivalent to ﬁnding the factors of a number:
Exercise 3.17:
Prove that a polynomial-time algorithm for ﬁnding the factors of a
number m exists if and only if the factoring decision problem is in P.
Factoring is an example of a problem in an important complexity class known as NP.
What distinguishes problems in NP is that ‘yes’ instances of a problem can easily be
veriﬁed with the aid of an appropriate witness. More rigorously, a language L is in NP
if there is a Turing machine M with the following properties:
(1) If x ∈L then there exists a witness string w such that M halts in the state qY after
a time polynomial in |x| when the machine is started in the state x-blank-w.
(2) If x ̸∈L then for all strings w which attempt to play the role of a witness, the
machine halts in state qN after a time polynomial in |x| when M is started in the
state x-blank-w.
There is an interesting asymmetry in the deﬁnition of NP. While we have to be able
to quickly decide whether a possible witness to x ∈L is truly a witness, there is no such
need to produce a witness to x ̸∈L. For instance, in the factoring problem, we have
an easy way of proving that a given number has a factor less than m, but exhibiting a
witness to prove that a number has no factors less than m is more daunting. This suggests
deﬁning coNP, the class of languages which have witnesses to ‘no’ instances; obviously
the languages in coNP are just the complements of languages in NP.
How are P and NP related? It is clear that P is a subset of NP. The most famous
open problem in computer science is whether or not there are problems in NP which are
not in P, often abbreviated as the P ̸= NP problem. Most computer scientists believe
that P ̸= NP, but despite decades of work nobody has been able to prove this, and the
possibility remains that P = NP.
Exercise 3.18:
Prove that if coNP ̸= NP then P ̸= NP.
Upon ﬁrst acquaintance it’s tempting to conclude that the conjecture P ̸= NP ought
to be pretty easy to resolve. To see why it’s actually rather subtle it helps to see couple of

===== PAGE 24 =====
The analysis of computational problems
143
examples of problems that are in P and NP. We’ll draw the examples from graph theory,
a rich source of decision problems with surprisingly many practical applications. A graph
is a ﬁnite collection of vertices {v1, . . . , vn} connected by edges, which are pairs (vi, vj)
of vertices. For now, we are only concerned with undirected graphs, in which the order
of the vertices (in each edge pair) does not matter; similar ideas can be investigated for
directed graphs in which the order of vertices does matter. A typical graph is illustrated
in Figure 3.9.
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥
❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
Figure 3.9. A graph.
A cycle in a graph is a sequence v1, . . . , vm of vertices such that each pair (vj, vj+1) is
an edge, as is (v1, vm). A simple cycle is a cycle in which none of the vertices is repeated,
except for the ﬁrst and last vertices. A Hamiltonian cycle is a simple cycle which visits
every vertex in the graph. Examples of graphs with and without Hamiltonian cycles are
shown in Figure 3.10.
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
!!
""⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
##❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥
❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥
$$❄❄❄❄❄❄❄
❄❄❄❄❄❄❄
""⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
%%
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
! " # $
% & ' (
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥❥
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
Figure 3.10. The graph on the left contains a Hamiltonian cycle, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 0. The graph on the right contains
no Hamiltonian cycle, as can be veriﬁed by inspection.
The Hamiltonian cycle problem (
) is to determine whether a given graph contains
a Hamiltonian cycle or not.
is a decision problem in NP, since if a given graph has a
Hamiltonian cycle, then that cycle can be used as an easily checkable witness. Moreover,
has no known polynomial time algorithm. Indeed,
is a problem in the class of
so-called NP-complete problems, which can be thought of as the ‘hardest’ problems in
NP, in the sense that solving
in time t allows any other problem in NP to be solved
in time O(poly(t)). This also means that if any NP-complete problem has a polynomial
time solution then it will follow that P = NP.
There is a problem, the Euler cycle decision problem, which is superﬁcially similar to
, but which has astonishingly different properties. An Euler cycle is an ordering of
the edges of a graph G so that every edge in the graph is visited exactly once. The Euler

===== PAGE 25 =====
144
Introduction to computer science
cycle decision problem (
) is to determine, given a graph G on n vertices, whether that
graph contains an Euler cycle or not.
is, in fact, exactly the same problem as
, only
the path visits edges, rather than vertices. Consider the following remarkable theorem,
to be proven in Exercise 3.20:
Theorem 3.1: (Euler’s theorem) A connected graph contains an Euler cycle if and
only if every vertex has an even number of edges incident upon it.
Euler’s theorem gives us a method for efﬁciently solving
. First, check to see whether
the graph is connected; this is easily done with O(n2) operations, as shown in Exer-
cise 3.19. If the graph is not connected, then obviously no Euler cycle exists. If the graph
is connected then for each vertex check whether there is an even number of edges incident
upon the vertex. If a vertex is found for which this is not the case, then there is no Euler
cycle, otherwise an Euler cycle exists. Since there are n vertices, and at most n(n −1)/2
edges, this algorithm requires O(n3) elementary operations. Thus
is in P! Somehow,
there is a structure present in the problem of visiting each edge that can be exploited
to provide an efﬁcient algorithm for
, yet which does not seem to be reﬂected in the
problem of visiting each vertex; it is not at all obvious why such a structure should be
present in one case, but not in the other, if indeed it is absent for the
problem.
Exercise 3.19:
The
problem is to determine whether there is a path
between two speciﬁed vertices in a graph. Show that
can be
solved using O(n) operations if the graph has n vertices. Use the solution to
to show that it is possible to decide whether a graph is connected
in O(n2) operations.
Exercise 3.20: (Euler’s theorem)
Prove Euler’s theorem. In particular, if each
vertex has an even number of incident edges, give a constructive procedure for
ﬁnding an Euler cycle.
The equivalence between the factoring decision problem and the factoring problem
proper is a special instance of one of the most important ideas in computer science, an
idea known as reduction. Intuitively, we know that some problems can be viewed as
special instances of other problems. A less trivial example of reduction is the reduction
of
to the traveling salesman decision problem (
). The traveling salesman decision
problem is as follows: we are given n cities 1, 2, . . . , n and a non-negative integer distance
dij between each pair of cities. Given a distance d the problem is to determine if there
is a tour of all the cities of distance less than d.
The reduction of
to
goes as follows. Suppose we have a graph containing n
vertices. We turn this into an instance of
by thinking of each vertex of the graph as a
‘city’ and deﬁning the distance dij between cities i and j to be one if vertices i and j are
connected, and the distance to be two if the vertices are unconnected. Then a tour of the
cities of distance less than n+1 must be of distance n, and be a Hamiltonian cycle for the
graph. Conversely, if a Hamiltonian cycle exists then a tour of the cities of distance less
than n + 1 must exist. In this way, given an algorithm for solving
, we can convert
it into an algorithm for solving
without much overhead. Two consequences can be
inferred from this. First, if
is a tractable problem, then
is also tractable. Second, if
is hard then
must also be hard. This is an example of a general technique known

===== PAGE 26 =====
The analysis of computational problems
145
as reduction: we’ve reduced the problem
to the problem
. This is a technique we
will use repeatedly throughout this book.
A more general notion of reduction is illustrated in Figure 3.11. A language B is
said to be reducible to another language A if there exists a Turing machine operating
in polynomial time such that given as input x it outputs R(x), and x ∈B if and only
if R(x) ∈A. Thus, if we have an algorithm for deciding A, then with a little extra
overhead we can decide the language B. In this sense, the language B is essentially no
more difﬁcult to decide than the language A.
x ∈B
R x
Is R x ∈A
!
!
!
Figure 3.11. Reduction of B to A.
Exercise 3.21: (Transitive property of reduction)
Show that if a language L1 is
reducible to the language L2 and the language L2 is reducible to L3 then the
language L1 is reducible to the language L3.
Some complexity classes have problems which are complete with respect to that com-
plexity class, meaning there is a language L in the complexity class which is the ‘most
difﬁcult’ to decide, in the sense that every other language in the complexity class can
be reduced to L. Not all complexity classes have complete problems, but many of the
complexity classes we are concerned with do have complete problems. A trivial example
is provided by P. Let L be any language in P which is not empty or equal to the set
of all words. That is, there exists a string x1 such that x1 ̸∈L and a string x2 such
that x2 ∈L. Then any other language L′ in P can be reduced to L using the following
reduction: given an input x, use the polynomial time decision procedure to determine
whether x ∈L′ or not. If it is not, then set R(x) = x1, otherwise set R(x) = x2.
Exercise 3.22:
Suppose L is complete for a complexity class, and L′ is another
language in the complexity class such that L reduces to L′. Show that L′ is
complete for the complexity class.
Less trivially, NP also contains complete problems. An important example of such a
problem and the prototype for all other NP-complete problems is the circuit satisﬁability
problem or
: given a Boolean circuit composed of
,
and
gates, is there
an assignment of values to the inputs to the circuit that results in the circuit outputting 1,
that is, is the circuit satisﬁable for some input? The NP-completeness of
is known
as the Cook–Levin theorem, for which we now outline a proof.
Compute
in polynomial time
Is
( )
?
‘‘Yes’’ or ‘‘No’’
( )

===== PAGE 27 =====
146
Introduction to computer science
Theorem 3.2: (Cook–Levin)
is NP-complete.
Proof
The proof has two parts. The ﬁrst part of the proof is to show that
is in NP, and
the second part is to show that any language in NP can be reduced to
. Both parts
of the proof are based on simulation techniques: the ﬁrst part of the proof is essentially
showing that a Turing machine can efﬁciently simulate a circuit, while the second part of
the proof is essentially showing that a circuit can efﬁciently simulate a Turing machine.
Both parts of the proof are quite straightforward; for the purposes of illustration we give
the second part in some detail.
The ﬁrst part of the proof is to show that
is in NP. Given a circuit containing
n circuit elements, and a potential witness w, it is obviously easy to check in polynomial
time on a Turing machine whether or not w satisﬁes the circuit, which establishes that
is in NP.
The second part of the proof is to show that any language L ∈NP can be reduced to
. That is, we aim to show that there is a polynomial time computable reduction R
such that x ∈L if and only if R(x) is a satisﬁable circuit. The idea of the reduction is
to ﬁnd a circuit which simulates the action of the machine M which is used to check
instance-witness pairs, (x, w), for the language L. The input variables for the circuit
will represent the witness; the idea is that ﬁnding a witness which satisﬁes the circuit is
equivalent to M accepting (x, w) for some speciﬁc witness w. Without loss of generality
we may make the following assumptions about M to simplify the construction:
(1) M’s tape alphabet is ▷,0,1 and the blank symbol.
(2) M runs using time at most t(n) and total space at most s(n) where t(n) and s(n)
are polynomials in n.
(3) Machine M can actually be assumed to run using time exactly t(n) for all inputs of
size n. This is done by adding the lines ∝qY, x, qY, x, 0∇, and ∝qN, x, qN, x, 0∇for
each of x = ▷, 0, 1 and the blank, artiﬁcially halting the machine after exactly t(n)
steps.
The basic idea of the construction to simulate M is outlined in Figure 3.12. Each
internal state of the Turing machine is represented by a single bit in the circuit. We
name the corresponding bits ˜qs, ˜q1, . . . , ˜qm, ˜qY, ˜qN. Initially, ˜qs is set to one, and all the
other bits representing internal states are set to zero. Each square on the Turing machine
tape is represented by three bits: two bits to represent the letter of the alphabet (▷, 0, 1
or blank) currently residing on the tape, and a single ‘ﬂag’ bit which is set to one if the
read-write head is pointing to the square, and set to zero otherwise. We denote the bits
representing the tape contents by (u1, v1), . . . , (us(n), vs(n)) and the corresponding ﬂag
bits by f1, . . . , fs(n). Initially the uj and vj bits are set to represent the inputs x and w,
as appropriate, while f1 = 1 and all other fj = 0. There is also a lone extra ‘global ﬂag’
bit, F, whose function will be explained later. F is initially set to zero. We regard all the
bits input to the circuit as ﬁxed, except for those representing the witness w, which are
the variable bits for the circuit.
The action of M is obtained by repeating t(n) times a ‘simulation step’ which
simulates the execution of a single program line for the Turing machine. Each
simulation step may be broken up into a sequence of steps corresponding in turn to the
respective program lines, with a ﬁnal step which resets the global ﬂag F to zero, as

===== PAGE 28 =====
The analysis of computational problems
147
qs
q1
qm
qY
qN
· · ·
✄
x
b
· · ·
w
· · ·
b
b
· · ·
F
· · ·
/
m+3
/
3n+6
/
3w(n)
/
3s(n)












⎫











⎬
m + 3










⎫









⎬





⎫




⎬





⎫




⎬
s n

⎫
⎬
˜qY
⎭
'(
)
t n
Figure 3.12. Outline of the procedure used to simulate a Turing machine using a circuit.
illustrated in Figure 3.13. To complete the simulation, we only need to simulate a
program line of the form ∝qi, x, qj, x′, s∇. For convenience, we assume qi ̸= qj, but a
similar construction works in the case when qi = qj. The procedure is as follows:
(1) Check to see that ˜qi = 1, indicating that the current state of the machine is qi.
(2) For each tape square:
(a) Check to see that the global ﬂag bit is set to zero, indicating that no action has
yet been taken by the Turing machine.
(b) Check that the ﬂag bit is set to one, indicating that the tape head is at this tape
square.
(c) Check that the simulated tape contents at this point are x.
(d) If all conditions check out, then perform the following steps:
1. Set ˜qi = 0 and ˜qj = 1.
2. Update the simulated tape contents at this tape square to x′.
3. Update the ﬂag bit of this and adjacent ‘squares’ as appropriate, depending
on whether s = +1, 0, −1, and whether we are at the left hand end of the
tape.
4. Set the global ﬂag bit to one, indicating that this round of computation has
been completed.
output
bit
Simulation
Step
Simulation
Step
Simulation
Step
fixed
inputbits
fixed
inputbits
variable
inputbits
fixed
inputbits
1 fixed
inputbit
3n + 6
3w(n)
3 ( )
( ) simulation steps
...
...
˜
˜
˜
˜
˜

===== PAGE 29 =====
148
Introduction to computer science
This is a ﬁxed procedure which involves a constant number of bits, and by the universality
result of Section 3.1.2 can be performed using a circuit containing a constant number of
gates.
Figure 3.13. Outline of the simulation step used to simulate a Turing machine using a circuit.
The total number of gates in the entire circuit is easily seen to be O(t(n)(s(n) + n)),
which is polynomial in size. At the end of the circuit, it is clear that ˜qY = 1 if and only
if the machine M accepts (x, w). Thus, the circuit is satisﬁable if and only if there exists
w such that machine M accepts (x, w), and we have found the desired reduction from
L to
.
gives us a foot in the door which enables us to easily prove that many other
problems are NP-complete. Instead of directly proving that a problem is NP-complete,
we can instead prove that it is in NP and that
reduces to it, so by Exercise 3.22 the
problem must be NP-complete. A small sample of NP-complete problems is discussed
in Box 3.3. An example of another NP-complete problem is the satisﬁability problem
(
), which is phrased in terms of a Boolean formula. Recall that a Boolean formula
ϕ is composed of the following elements: a set of Boolean variables, x1, x2, . . .; Boolean
connectives, that is, a Boolean function with one or two inputs and one output, such as
∧(AND), ∨(OR), and ¬ (NOT); and parentheses. The truth or falsity of a Boolean
formula for a given set of Boolean variables is decided according to the usual laws of
Boolean algebra. For example, the formula ϕ = x1 ∨¬x2 has the satisfying assignment
x1 = 0 and x2 = 0, while x1 = 0 and x2 = 1 is not a satisfying assignment. The
satisﬁability problem is to determine, given a Boolean formula ϕ, whether or not it is
satisﬁable by any set of possible inputs.
Exercise 3.23:
Show that
is NP-complete by ﬁrst showing that
is in NP, and
then showing that
reduces to
. (Hint: for the reduction it may help to
represent each distinct wire in an instance of
by different variables in a
Boolean formula.)
An important restricted case of
is also NP-complete, the 3-satisﬁability problem
(
), which is concerned with formulae in 3-conjunctive normal form. A formula is
said to be in conjunctive normal form if it is the AND of a collection of clauses, each of
which is the OR of one or more literals, where a literal is an expression is of the form x
or ¬x. For example, the formula (x1 ∨¬x2) ∧(x2 ∨x3 ∨¬x4) is in conjunctive normal
form. A formula is in 3-conjunctive normal form or 3-CNF if each clause has exactly
three literals. For example, the formula (¬x1∨x2∨¬x2)∧(¬x1∨x3∨¬x4)∧(x2∨x3∨x4)
is in 3-conjunctive normal form. The 3-satisﬁability problem is to determine whether a
formula in 3-conjunctive normal form is satisﬁable or not.
The proof that
is NP-complete is straightforward, but is a little too lengthy to
justify inclusion in this overview. Even more than
and
,
is in some sense

===== PAGE 30 =====
The analysis of computational problems
149
the NP-complete problem, and it is the basis for countless proofs that other problems
are NP-complete. We conclude our discussion of NP-completeness with the surprising
fact that
, the analogue of
in which every clause has two literals, can be solved
in polynomial time:
Exercise 3.24: (
has an efﬁcient solution)
Suppose ϕ is a Boolean formula in
conjunctive normal form, in which each clause contains only two literals.
(1) Construct a (directed) graph G(ϕ) with directed edges in the following way:
the vertices of G correspond to variables xj and their negations ¬xj in ϕ.
There is a (directed) edge (α, β) in G if and only if the clause (¬α ∨β) or
the clause (β ∨¬α) is present in ϕ. Show that ϕ is not satisﬁable if and only
if there exists a variable x such that there are paths from x to ¬x and from
¬x to x in G(ϕ).
(2) Show that given a directed graph G containing n vertices it is possible to
determine whether two vertices v1 and v2 are connected in polynomial time.
(3) Find an efﬁcient algorithm to solve
.
Box 3.3: A zoo of NP-complete problems
The importance of the class NP derives, in part, from the enormous number of
computational problems that are known to be NP-complete. We can’t possibly hope
to survey this topic here (see ‘History and further reading’), but the following ex-
amples, taken from many distinct areas of mathematics, give an idea of the delicious
melange of problems known to be NP-complete.
•
(graph theory): A clique in an undirected graph G is a subset of
vertices, each pair of which is connected by an edge. The size of a clique is the
number of vertices it contains. Given an integer m and a graph G, does G have
a clique of size m?
•
(arithmetic): Given a ﬁnite collection S of positive integers and a
target t, is there any subset of S which sums to t?
•
(linear programming): Given an integer m × n
matrix A and an m-dimensional vector y with integer values, does there exist
an n-dimensional vector x with entries in the set {0, 1} such that Ax ⇒y?
•
(graph theory): A vertex cover for an undirected graph G is a
set of vertices V ′ such that every edge in the graph has one or both vertices
contained in V ′. Given an integer m and a graph G, does G have a vertex
cover V ′ containing m vertices?
Assuming that P ̸= NP it is possible to prove that there is a non-empty class of
problems NPI (NP intermediate) which are neither solvable with polynomial resources,
nor are NP-complete. Obviously, there are no problems known to be in NPI (otherwise
we would know that P ̸= NP) but there are several problems which are regarded as
being likely candidates. Two of the strongest candidates are the factoring and graph
isomorphism problems:

===== PAGE 31 =====
150
Introduction to computer science
: Suppose G and G′ are two undirected graphs over the
vertices V ↔{v1, . . . , vn}. Are G and G′ isomorphic? That is, does there exist a
one-to-one function ϕ : V ◦V such that the edge (vi, vj) is contained in G if
and only if (ϕ(vi), ϕ(vj)) is contained in G?
Problems in NPI are interesting to researchers in quantum computation and quantum
information for two reasons. First, it is desirable to ﬁnd fast quantum algorithms to solve
problems which are not in P. Second, many suspect that quantum computers will not
be able to efﬁciently solve all problems in NP, ruling out NP-complete problems. Thus,
it is natural to focus on the class NPI. Indeed, a fast quantum algorithm for factoring
has been discovered (Chapter 5), and this has motivated the search for fast quantum
algorithms for other problems suspected to be in NPI.
3.2.4
A plethora of complexity classes
We have investigated some of the elementary properties of some important complexity
classes. A veritable pantheon of complexity classes exists, and there are many non-trivial
relationships known or suspected between these classes. For quantum computation and
quantum information, it is not necessary to understand all the different complexity classes
that have been deﬁned. However, it is useful to have some appreciation for the more
important of the complexity classes, many of which have natural analogues in the study
of quantum computation and quantum information. Furthermore, if we are to understand
how powerful quantum computers are, then it behooves us to understand how the class
of problems solvable on a quantum computer ﬁts into the zoo of complexity classes which
may be deﬁned for classical computers.
There are essentially three properties that may be varied in the deﬁnition of a complex-
ity class: the resource of interest (time, space, . . . ), the type of problem being considered
(decision problem, optimization problem, . . . ), and the underlying computational model
(deterministic Turing machine, probabilistic Turing machine, quantum computer, . . . ).
Not surprisingly, this gives us an enormous range to deﬁne complexity classes. In this
section, we brieﬂy review a few of the more important complexity classes and some of
their elementary properties. We begin with a complexity class deﬁned by changing the
resource of interest from time to space.
The most natural space-bounded complexity class is the class PSPACE of decision
problems which may be solved on a Turing machine using a polynomial number of
working bits, with no limitation on the amount of time that may be used by the machine
(see Exercise 3.25). Obviously, P is included in PSPACE, since a Turing machine that
halts after polynomial time can only traverse polynomially many squares, but it is also true
that NP is a subset of PSPACE. To see this, suppose L is any language in NP. Suppose
problems of size n have witnesses of size at most p(n), where p(n) is some polynomial
in n. To determine whether or not the problem has a solution, we may sequentially
test all 2p(n) possible witnesses. Each test can be run in polynomial time, and therefore
polynomial space. If we erase all the intermediate working between tests then we can test
all the possibilities using polynomial space.
Unfortunately, at present it is not even known whether PSPACE contains problems
which are not in P! This is a pretty remarkable situation – it seems fairly obvious that
having unlimited time and polynomial spatial resources must be more powerful than
having only a polynomial amount of time. However, despite considerable effort and in-

===== PAGE 32 =====
The analysis of computational problems
151
genuity, this has never been shown. We will see later that the class of problems solvable
on a quantum computer in polynomial time is a subset of PSPACE, so proving that a
problem efﬁciently solvable on a quantum computer is not efﬁciently solvable on a clas-
sical computer would establish that P ̸= PSPACE, and thus solve a major outstanding
problem of computer science. An optimistic way of looking at this result is that ideas
from quantum computation might be useful in proving that P ̸= PSPACE. Pessimisti-
cally, one might conclude that it will be a long time before anyone rigorously proves that
quantum computers can be used to efﬁciently solve problems that are intractable on a
classical computer. Even more pessimistically, it is possible that P = PSPACE, in which
case quantum computers offer no advantage over classical computers! However, very few
(if any) computational complexity theorists believe that P = PSPACE.
Exercise 3.25: (PSPACE ⊆EXP)
The complexity class EXP (for exponential time)
contains all decision problems which may be decided by a Turing machine
running in exponential time, that is time O(2nk), where k is any constant. Prove
that PSPACE ⊆EXP. (Hint: If a Turing machine has l internal states, an m
letter alphabet, and uses space p(n), argue that the machine can exist in one of at
most lmp(n) different states, and that if the Turing machine is to avoid inﬁnite
loops then it must halt before revisiting a state.)
Exercise 3.26: (L ⊆P)
The complexity class L (for logarithmic space) contains all
decision problems which may be decided by a Turing machine running in
logarithmic space, that is, in space O(log(n)). More precisely, the class L is
deﬁned using a two-tape Turing machine. The ﬁrst tape contains the problem
instance, of size n, and is a read-only tape, in the sense that only program lines
which don’t change the contents of the ﬁrst tape are allowed. The second tape is
a working tape which initially contains only blanks. The logarithmic space
requirement is imposed on the second, working tape only. Show that L ⊆P.
Does allowing more time or space give greater computational power? The answer
to this question is yes in both cases. Roughly speaking, the time hierarchy theorem
states that TIME(f(n)) is a proper subset of TIME(f(n) log2(f(n))). Similarly, the space
hierarchy theorem states that SPACE(f(n)) is a proper subset of SPACE(f(n) log(f(n))),
where SPACE(f(n)) is, of course, the complexity class consisting of all languages that
can be decided with spatial resources O(f(n)). The hierarchy theorems have interesting
implications with respect to the equality of complexity classes. We know that
L ⊆P ⊆NP ⊆PSPACE ⊆EXP.
(3.1)
Unfortunately, although each of these inclusions is widely believed to be strict, none of
them has ever been proved to be strict. However, the time hierarchy theorem implies
that P is a strict subset of EXP, and the space hierarchy theorem implies that L is a strict
subset of PSPACE! So we can conclude that at least one of the inclusions in (3.1) must
be strict, although we do not know which one.
What should we do with a problem once we know that it is NP-complete, or that
some other hardness criterion holds? It turns out that this is far from being the end of
the story in problem analysis. One possible line of attack is to identify special cases of
the problem which may be amenable to attack. For example, in Exercise 3.24 we saw
that the
problem has an efﬁcient solution, despite the NP-completeness of
.

===== PAGE 33 =====
152
Introduction to computer science
Another approach is to change the type of problem which is being considered, a tactic
which typically results in the deﬁnition of new complexity classes. For example, instead
of ﬁnding exact solutions to an NP-complete problem, we can instead try to ﬁnd good
algorithms for ﬁnding approximate solutions to a problem. For example, the
problem is an NP-complete problem, yet in Exercise 3.27 we show that it is
possible to efﬁciently ﬁnd an approximation to the minimal vertex cover which is correct
to within a factor two! On the other hand, in Problem 3.6 we show that it is not possible
to ﬁnd approximations to solutions of
correct to within any factor, unless P = NP!
Exercise 3.27: (Approximation algorithm for
)
Let G = (V, E)
be an undirected graph. Prove that the following algorithm ﬁnds a vertex cover
for G that is within a factor two of being a minimal vertex cover:
V C = ∅
E′ = E
do until E′ = ∅
let (α, β) be any edge of E′
V C = V C ∪{α, β}
remove from E′ every edge incident on α or β
return V C.
Why is it possible to approximate the solution of one NP-complete problem, but
not another? After all, isn’t it possible to efﬁciently transform from one problem to
another? This is certainly true, however it is not necessarily true that this transformation
preserves the notion of a ‘good approximation’ to a solution. As a result, the computational
complexity theory of approximation algorithms for problems in NP has a structure that
goes beyond the structure of NP proper. An entire complexity theory of approximation
algorithms exists, which unfortunately is beyond the scope of this book. The basic idea,
however, is to deﬁne a notion of reduction that corresponds to being able to efﬁciently
reduce one approximation problem to another, in such a way that the notion of good
approximation is preserved. With such a notion, it is possible to deﬁne complexity classes
such as MAXSNP by analogy to the class NP, as the set of problems for which it is
possible to efﬁciently verify approximate solutions to the problem. Complete problems
exist for MAXSNP, just as for NP, and it is an interesting open problem to determine
how the class MAXSNP compares to the class of approximation problems which are
efﬁciently solvable.
We conclude our discussion with a complexity class that results when the underlying
model of computation itself is changed. Suppose a Turing machine is endowed with
the ability to ﬂip coins, using the results of the coin tosses to decide what actions to
take during the computation. Such a Turing machine may only accept or reject inputs
with a certain probability. The complexity class BPP (for bounded-error probabilistic
time) contains all languages L with the property that there exists a probabilistic Turing
machine M such that if x ∈L then M accepts x with probability at least 3/4, and if
x ̸∈L, then M rejects x with probability at least 3/4. The following exercise shows that
the choice of the constant 3/4 is essentially arbitrary:

===== PAGE 34 =====
The analysis of computational problems
153
Exercise 3.28: (Arbitrariness of the constant in the deﬁnition of BPP)
Suppose
k is a ﬁxed constant, 1/2 < k ⇒1. Suppose L is a language such that there
exists a Turing machine M with the property that whenever x ∈L, M accepts
x with probability at least k, and whenever x ̸∈L, M rejects x with probability
at least k. Show that L ∈BPP.
Indeed, the Chernoff bound, discussed in Box 3.4, implies that with just a few repetitions
of an algorithm deciding a language in BPP the probability of success can be ampliﬁed
to the point where it is essentially equal to one, for all intents and purposes. For this
reason, BPP even more than P is the class of decision problems which is usually regarded
as being efﬁciently solvable on a classical computer, and it is the quantum analogue of
BPP, known as BQP, that is most interesting in our study of quantum algorithms.
3.2.5
Energy and computation
Computational complexity studies the amount of time and space required to solve a
computational problem. Another important computational resource is energy. In this
section, we study the energy requirements for computation. Surprisingly, it turns out that
computation, both classical and quantum, can in principle be done without expending
any energy! Energy consumption in computation turns out to be deeply linked to the
reversibility of the computation. Consider a gate like the
gate, which takes as
input two bits, and produces a single bit as output. This gate is intrinsically irreversible
because, given the output of the gate, the input is not uniquely determined. For example,
if the output of the
gate is 1, then the input could have been any one of 00, 01,
or 10. On the other hand, the
gate is an example of a reversible logic gate because,
given the output of the
gate, it is possible to infer what the input must have been.
Another way of understanding irreversibility is to think of it in terms of information
erasure. If a logic gate is irreversible, then some of the information input to the gate is lost
irretrievably when the gate operates – that is, some of the information has been erased by
the gate. Conversely, in a reversible computation, no information is ever erased, because
the input can always be recovered from the output. Thus, saying that a computation is
reversible is equivalent to saying that no information is erased during the computation.
What is the connection between energy consumption and irreversibility in compu-
tation? Landauer’s principle provides the connection, stating that, in order to erase
information, it is necessary to dissipate energy. More precisely, Landauer’s principle
may be stated as follows:
Landauer’s principle (ﬁrst form): Suppose a computer erases a single bit of
information. The amount of energy dissipated into the environment is at least
kBT ln 2, where kB is a universal constant known as Boltzmann’s constant, and T
is the temperature of the environment of the computer.
According to the laws of thermodynamics, Landauer’s principle can be given an alterna-
tive form stated not in terms of energy dissipation, but rather in terms of entropy:
Landauer’s principle (second form): Suppose a computer erases a single bit of
information. The entropy of the environment increases by at least kB ln 2, where
kB is Boltzmann’s constant.
Justifying Landauer’s principle is a problem of physics that lies beyond the scope of this

===== PAGE 35 =====
154
Introduction to computer science
Box 3.4: BPP and the Chernoff bound
Suppose we have an algorithm for a decision problem which gives the correct answer
with probability 1/2 + ϵ, and the wrong answer with probability 1/2 −ϵ. If we run
the algorithm n times, then it seems reasonable to guess that the correct answer is
whichever appeared most frequently. How reliably does this procedure work? The
Chernoff bound is a simple result from elementary probability which answers this
question.
Theorem 3.3: (The Chernoff bound) Suppose X1, . . . , Xn are independent and
identically distributed random variables, each taking the value 1 with
probability 1/2 + ϵ, and the value 0 with probability 1/2 −ϵ. Then
p
* n
+
i=1
Xi ⇒n/2
,
⇒e−2ϵ2n.
(3.2)
Proof
Consider any sequence (x1, . . . , xn) containing at most n/2 ones. The probability
of such a sequence occurring is maximized when it contains ⌊n/2⌋ones, so
p(X1 = x1, . . . , Xn = xn) ⇒
-1
2 −ϵ
. n
2 -1
2 + ϵ
. n
2
(3.3)
= (1 −4ϵ2)
n
2
2n
.
(3.4)
There can be at most 2n such sequences, so
p
*+
i
Xi ⇒n/2
,
⇒2n × (1 −4ϵ2)
n
2
2n
= (1 −4ϵ2)
n
2 .
(3.5)
Finally, by calculus, 1 −x ⇒exp(−x), so
p
*+
i
Xi ⇒n/2
,
⇒e−4ϵ2n/2 = e−2ϵ2n.
(3.6)
What this tells us is that for ﬁxed ϵ, the probability of making an error decreases
exponentially quickly in the number of repetitions of the algorithm. In the case of
BPP we have ϵ = 1/4, so it takes only a few hundred repetitions of the algorithm
to reduce the probability of error below 10−20, at which point an error in one of
the computer’s components becomes much more likely than an error due to the
probabilistic nature of the algorithm.
book – see the end of chapter ‘History and further reading’ if you wish to understand why
Landauer’s principle holds. However, if we accept Landauer’s principle as given, then it
raises a number of interesting questions. First of all, Landauer’s principle only provides
a lower bound on the amount of energy that must be dissipated to erase information.

===== PAGE 36 =====
The analysis of computational problems
155
How close are existing computers to this lower bound? Not very, turns out to be the
answer – computers circa the year 2000 dissipate roughly 500kBT ln 2 in energy for each
elementary logical operation.
Although existing computers are far from the limit set by Landauer’s principle, it is
still an interesting problem of principle to understand how much the energy consumption
can be reduced. Aside from the intrinsic interest of the problem, a practical reason for the
interest follows from Moore’s law: if computer power keeps increasing then the amount
of energy dissipated must also increase, unless the energy dissipated per operation drops
at least as fast as the rate of increase in computing power.
If all computations could be done reversibly, then Landauer’s principle would imply no
lower bound on the amount of energy dissipated by the computer, since no bits at all are
erased during a reversible computation. Of course, it is possible that some other physical
principle might require that energy be dissipated during the computation; fortunately,
this turns out not to be the case. But is it possible to perform universal computation
without erasing any information? Physicists can cheat on this problem to see in advance
that the answer to this question must be yes, because our present understanding of the
laws of physics is that they are fundamentally reversible. That is, if we know the ﬁnal
state of a closed physical system, then the laws of physics allow us to work out the initial
state of the system. If we believe that those laws are correct, then we must conclude that
hidden in the irreversible logic gates like
and
, there must be some underlying
reversible computation. But where is this hidden reversibility, and can we use it to
construct manifestly reversible computers?
We will use two different techniques to give reversible circuit-based models capable
of universal computation. The ﬁrst model, a computer built entirely of billiard balls and
mirrors, gives a beautiful concrete realization of the principles of reversible computation.
The second model, based on a reversible logic gate known as the Toffoli gate (which we
ﬁrst encountered in Section 1.4.1), is a more abstract view of reversible computation that
will later be of great use in our discussion of quantum computation. It is also possible to
build reversible Turing machines that are universal for computation; however, we won’t
study these here, since the reversible circuit models turn out to be much more useful for
quantum computation.
The basic idea of the billiard ball computer is illustrated in Figure 3.14. Billiard ball
‘inputs’ enter the computer from the left hand side, bouncing off mirrors and each other,
before exiting as ‘outputs’ on the right hand side. The presence or absence of a billiard
ball at a possible input site is used to indicate a logical 1 or a logical 0, respectively. The
fascinating thing about this model is that it is manifestly reversible, insofar as its operation
is based on the laws of classical mechanics. Furthermore, this model of computation turns
out to be universal in the sense that it can be used to simulate an arbitrary computation
in the standard circuit model of computation.
Of course, if a billiard ball computer were ever built it would be highly unstable. As
any billiards player can attest, a billiard ball rolling frictionlessly over a smooth surface is
easily knocked off course by small perturbations. The billiard ball model of computation
depends on perfect operation, and the absence of external perturbations such as those
caused by thermal noise. Periodic corrections can be performed, but information gained
by doing this would have to be erased, requiring work to be performed. Expenditure of
energy thus serves the purpose of reducing this susceptibility to noise, which is necessary
for a practical, real-world computational machine. For the purposes of this introduction,

===== PAGE 37 =====
156
Introduction to computer science
!
"
#
!$
"$
#$
F
Figure 3.14. A simple billiard ball computer, with three input bits and three output bits, shown entering on the left
and leaving on the right, respectively. The presence or absence of a billiard ball indicates a 1 or a 0, respectively.
Empty circles illustrate potential paths due to collisions. This particular computer implements the Fredkin classical
reversible logic gate, discussed in the text.
we will ignore the effects of noise on the billiard ball computer, and concentrate on
understanding the essential elements of reversible computation.
The billiard ball computer provides an elegant means for implementing a reversible
universal logic gate known as the Fredkin gate. Indeed, the properties of the Fredkin gate
provide an informative overview of the general principles of reversible logic gates and
circuits. The Fredkin gate has three input bits and three output bits, which we refer to
as a, b, c and a′, b′, c′, respectively. The bit c is a control bit, whose value is not changed
by the action of the Fredkin gate, that is, c′ = c. The reason c is called the control bit
is because it controls what happens to the other two bits, a and b. If c is set to 0 then a
and b are left alone, a′ = a, b′ = b. If c is set to 1, a and b are swapped, a′ = b, b′ = a.
The explicit truth table for the Fredkin gate is shown in Figure 3.15. It is easy to see
that the Fredkin gate is reversible, because given the output a′, b′, c′, we can determine
the inputs a, b, c. In fact, to recover the original inputs a, b and c we need only apply
another Fredkin gate to a′, b′, c′:
Exercise 3.29: (Fredkin gate is self-inverse)
Show that applying two consecutive
Fredkin gates gives the same outputs as inputs.
Examining the paths of the billiard balls in Figure 3.14, it is not difﬁcult to verify that
this billiard ball computer implements the Fredkin gate:
Exercise 3.30:
Verify that the billiard ball computer in Figure 3.14 computes the
Fredkin gate.
In addition to reversibility, the Fredkin gate also has the interesting property that
the number of 1s is conserved between the input and output. In terms of the billiard
ball computer, this corresponds to the number of billiard balls going into the Fredkin
gate being equal to the number coming out. Thus, it is sometimes referred to as being
a conservative reversible logic gate. Such reversibility and conservative properties are
interesting to a physicist because they can be motivated by fundamental physical princi-

===== PAGE 38 =====
The analysis of computational problems
157
Inputs
Outputs
a
b
c
a′
b′
c′
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
Figure 3.15. Fredkin gate truth table and circuit representation. The bits a and b are swapped if the control bit c is
set, and otherwise are left alone.
ples. The laws of Nature are reversible, with the possible exception of the measurement
postulate of quantum mechanics, discussed in Section 2.2.3 on page 84. The conservative
property can be thought of as analogous to properties such as conservation of mass, or
conservation of energy. Indeed, in the billiard ball model of computation the conservative
property corresponds exactly to conservation of mass.
Figure 3.16. Fredkin gate conﬁgured to perform the elementary gates
(left),
(middle), and a primitive
routing function, the
(right). The middle gate also serves to perform the
operation, since it
produces two copies of x at the output. Note that each of these conﬁgurations requires the use of extra ‘ancilla’ bits
prepared in standard states – for example, the 0 input on the ﬁrst line of the
gate – and in general the output
contains ‘garbage’ not needed for the remainder of the computation.
The Fredkin gate is not only reversible and conservative, it’s a universal logic gate
as well! As illustrated in Figure 3.16, the Fredkin gate can be conﬁgured to simulate
,
,
and
functions, and thus can be cascaded to simulate any
classical circuit whatsoever.
To simulate irreversible gates such as
using the Fredkin gate, we made use of two
ideas. First, we allowed the input of ‘ancilla’ bits to the Fredkin gate, in specially prepared
states, either 0 or 1. Second, the output of the Fredkin gate contained extraneous ‘garbage’
not needed for the remainder of the computation. These ancilla and garbage bits are not
directly important to the computation. Their importance lies in the fact that they make
the computation reversible. Indeed the irreversibility of gates like the
and
may
be viewed as a consequence of the ancilla and garbage bits being ‘hidden’. Summarizing,
given any classical circuit computing a function f(x), we can build a reversible circuit
made entirely of Fredkin gates, which on input of x, together with some ancilla bits

===== PAGE 39 =====
158
Introduction to computer science
in a standard state a, computes f(x), together with some extra ‘garbage’ output, g(x).
Therefore, we represent the action of the computation as (x, a) ◦(f(x), g(x)).
We now know how to compute functions reversibly. Unfortunately, this computation
produces unwanted garbage bits. With some modiﬁcations it turns out to be possible
to perform the computation so that any garbage bits produced are in a standard state.
This construction is crucial for quantum computation, because garbage bits whose value
depends upon x will in general destroy the interference properties crucial to quantum
computation. To understand how this works it is convenient to assume that the
gate
is available in our repertoire of reversible gates, so we may as well assume that the ancilla
bits a all start out as 0s, with
gates being added where necessary to turn the ancilla
0s into 1s. It will also be convenient to assume that the classical controlled-
gate is
available, deﬁned in a manner analogous to the quantum deﬁnition of Section 1.3.2, that
is, the inputs (c, t) are taken to (c, t ≺c), where ≺denotes addition modulo 2. Notice
that t = 0 gives (c, 0) ◦(c, c), so the controlled-
can be thought of as a reversible
copying gate or
, which leaves no garbage bits at the output.
With the additional
gates appended at the beginning of the circuit, the action
of the computation may be written as (x, 0) ◦(f(x), g(x)). We could also have added
gates to the beginning of the circuit, in order to create a copy of x which is not
changed during the subsequent computation. With this modiﬁcation, the action of the
circuit may be written
(x, 0, 0) ◦(x, f(x), g(x)) .
(3.7)
Equation (3.7) is a very useful way of writing the action of the reversible circuit, because
it allows an idea known as uncomputation to be used to get rid of the garbage bits, for a
small cost in the running time of the computation. The idea is the following. Suppose we
start with a four register computer in the state (x, 0, 0, y). The second register is used to
store the result of the computation, and the third register is used to provide workspace for
the computation, that is, the garbage bits g(x). The use of the fourth register is described
shortly, and we assume it starts in an arbitrary state y.
We begin as before, by applying a reversible circuit to compute f, resulting in the state
(x, f(x), g(x), y). Next, we use
s to add the result f(x) bitwise to the fourth register,
leaving the machine in the state (x, f(x), g(x), y ≺f(x)). However, all the steps used to
compute f(x) were reversible and did not affect the fourth register, so by applying the
reverse of the circuit used to compute f we come to the state (x, 0, 0, y≺f(x)). Typically,
we omit the ancilla 0s from the description of the function evaluation, and just write the
action of the circuit as
(x, y) ◦(x, y ≺f(x)) .
(3.8)
In general we refer to this modiﬁed circuit computing f as the reversible circuit computing
f, even though in principle there are many other reversible circuits which could be used
to compute f.
What resource overhead is involved in doing reversible computation? To analyze this
question, we need to count the number of extra ancilla bits needed in a reversible circuit,
and compare the gate counts with classical models. It ought to be clear that the number of
gates in a reversible circuit is the same as in an irreversible circuit to within the constant
factor which represents the number of Fredkin gates needed to simulate a single element
of the irreversible circuit, and an additional factor of two for uncomputation, with an

===== PAGE 40 =====
The analysis of computational problems
159
overhead for the extra
operations used in reversible computation which is linear in
the number of bits involved in the circuit. Similarly, the number of ancilla bits required
scales at most linearly with the number of gates in the irreversible circuit, since each
element in the irreversible circuit can be simulated using a constant number of ancilla
bits. As a result, natural complexity classes such as P and NP are the same no matter
whether a reversible or irreversible model of computation is used. For more elaborate
complexity classes like PSPACE the situation is not so immediately clear; see Problem 3.9
and ‘History and further reading’ for a discussion of some such subtleties.
Exercise 3.31: (Reversible half-adder)
Construct a reversible circuit which, when
two bits x and y are input, outputs (x, y, c, x ≺y), where c is the carry bit when
x and y are added.
The Fredkin gate and its implementation using the billiard ball computer offers a
beautiful paradigm for reversible computation. There is another reversible logic gate, the
Toffoli gate, which is also universal for classical computation. While the Toffoli gate does
not have quite the same elegant physical simplicity as the billiard ball implementation of
the Fredkin gate, it will be more useful in the study of quantum computation. We have
already met the Toffoli gate in Section 1.4.1, but for convenience we review its properties
here.
The Toffoli gate has three input bits, a, b and c. a and b are known as the ﬁrst and
second control bits, while c is the target bit. The gate leaves both control bits unchanged,
ﬂips the target bit if both control bits are set, and otherwise leaves the target bit alone.
The truth table and circuit representation for the Toffoli gate are shown in Figure 3.17.
Inputs
Outputs
a
b
c
a′
b′
c′
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
Figure 3.17. Truth table and circuit representation of the Toffoli gate.
How can the Toffoli gate be used to do universal computation? Suppose we wish to
the bits a and b. To do this using the Toffoli gate, we input a and b as control
bits, and send in an ancilla bit set to 1 as the target bit, as shown in Figure 3.18. The
of a and b is output as the target bit. As expected from our study of the Fredkin
gate, the Toffoli gate simulation of a
requires the use of a special ancilla input,
and some of the outputs from the simulation are garbage bits.
The Toffoli gate can also be used to implement the
operation by inputting
an ancilla 1 to the ﬁrst control bit, and a to the second control bit, producing the output
1, a, a. This is illustrated in Figure 3.19. Recalling that
and
are together

===== PAGE 41 =====
160
Introduction to computer science
Figure 3.18. Implementing a
gate using a Toffoli gate. The top two bits represent the input to the
,
while the third bit is prepared in the standard state 1, sometimes known as an ancilla state. The output from the
is on the third bit.
universal for computation, we see that an arbitrary circuit can be efﬁciently simulated
using a reversible circuit consisting only of Toffoli gates and ancilla bits, and that useful
additional techniques such as uncomputation may be achieved using the same methods
as were employed with the Fredkin gate.
Figure 3.19.
with the Toffoli gate, with the second bit being the input to the
, and the other two
bits standard ancilla states. The output from
appears on the second and third bits.
Our interest in reversible computation was motivated by our desire to understand the
energy requirements for computation. It is clear that the noise-free billiard ball model
of computation requires no energy for its operation; what about models based upon
the Toffoli gate? This can only be determined by examining speciﬁc models for the
computation of the Toffoli gate. In Chapter 7, we examine several such implementations,
and it turns out that, indeed, the Toffoli gate can be implemented in a manner which
does not require the expenditure of energy.
There is a signiﬁcant caveat attached to the idea that computation can be done without
the expenditure of energy. As we noted earlier, the billiard ball model of computation is
highly sensitive to noise, and this is true of many other models of reversible computation.
To nullify the effects of noise, some form of error-correction needs to be done. Such
error-correction typically involves the performance of measurements on the system to
determine whether the system is behaving as expected, or if an error has occurred.
Because the computer’s memory is ﬁnite, the bits used to store the measurement results
utilized in error-correction must eventually be erased to make way for new measurement
results. According to Landauer’s principle, this erasure carries an associated energy cost

===== PAGE 42 =====
Perspectives on computer science
161
that must be accounted for when tallying the total energy cost of the computation. We
analyze the energy cost associated with error-correction in more detail in Section 12.4.4.
What can we conclude from our study of reversible computation? There are three
key ideas. First, reversibility stems from keeping track of every bit of information; irre-
versibility occurs only when information is lost or erased. Second, by doing computation
reversibly, we obviate the need for energy expenditure during computation. All computa-
tions can be done, in principle, for zero cost in energy. Third, reversible computation can
be done efﬁciently, without the production of garbage bits whose value depends upon the
input to the computation. That is, if there is an irreversible circuit computing a function
f, then there is an efﬁcient simulation of this circuit by a reversible circuit with action
(x, y) ◦(x, y ≺f(x)).
What are the implications of these results for physics, computer science, and for
quantum computation and quantum information? From the point of view of a physicist
or hardware engineer worried about heat dissipation, the good news is that, in principle,
it is possible to make computation dissipation-free by making it reversible, although in
practice energy dissipation is required for system stability and immunity from noise. At
an even more fundamental level, the ideas leading to reversible computation also lead to
the resolution of a century-old problem in the foundations of physics, the famous problem
of Maxwell’s demon. The story of this problem and its resolution is outlined in Box 3.5
on page 162. From the point of view of a computer scientist, reversible computation
validates the use of irreversible elements in models of computation such as the Turing
machine (since using them or not gives polynomially equivalent models). Moreover, since
the physical world is fundamentally reversible, one can argue that complexity classes
based upon reversible models of computation are more natural than complexity classes
based upon irreversible models, a point revisited in Problem 3.9 and ‘History and further
reading’. From the point of view of quantum computation and quantum information,
reversible computation is enormously important. To harness the full power of quantum
computation, any classical subroutines in a quantum computation must be performed
reversibly and without the production of garbage bits depending on the classical input.
Exercise 3.32: (From Fredkin to Toffoli and back again)
What is the smallest
number of Fredkin gates needed to simulate a Toffoli gate? What is the smallest
number of Toffoli gates needed to simulate a Fredkin gate?
3.3
Perspectives on computer science
In a short introduction such as this chapter, it is not remotely possible to cover in detail
all the great ideas of a ﬁeld as rich as computer science. We hope to have conveyed
to you something of what it means to think like a computer scientist, and provided a
basic vocabulary and overview of some of the fundamental concepts important in the
understanding of computation. To conclude this chapter, we brieﬂy touch on some more
general issues, in order to provide some perspective on how quantum computation and
quantum information ﬁts into the overall picture of computer science.
Our discussion has revolved around the Turing machine model of computation. How
does the computational power of unconventional models of computation such as massively
parallel computers, DNA computers and analog computers compare with the standard

===== PAGE 43 =====
162
Introduction to computer science
Box 3.5: Maxwell’s demon
The laws of thermodynamics govern the amount of work that can be performed by
a physical system at thermodynamic equilibrium. One of these laws, the second law
of thermodynamics, states that the entropy in a closed system can never decrease.
In 1871, James Clerk Maxwell proposed the existence of a machine that apparently
violated this law. He envisioned a miniature little ‘demon’, like that shown in the
ﬁgure below, which could reduce the entropy of a gas cylinder initially at equilibrium
by individually separating the fast and slow molecules into the two halves of the
cylinder. This demon would sit at a little door at the middle partition. When a
fast molecule approaches from the left side the demon opens a door between the
partitions, allowing the molecule through, and then closes the door. By doing this
many times the total entropy of the cylinder can be decreased, in apparent violation
of the second law of thermodynamics.
The resolution to the Maxwell’s demon paradox lies in the fact that the demon must
perform measurements on the molecules moving between the partitions, in order
to determine their velocities. The result of this measurement must be stored in the
demon’s memory. Because any memory is ﬁnite, the demon must eventually begin
erasing information from its memory, in order to have space for new measurement
results. By Landauer’s principle, this act of erasing information increases the total
entropy of the combined system – demon, gas cylinder, and their environments. In
fact, a complete analysis shows that Landauer’s principle implies that the entropy of
the combined system is increased at least as much by this act of erasing information
as the entropy of the combined system is decreased by the actions of the demon,
thus ensuring that the second law of thermodynamics is obeyed.
Turing machine model of computation and, implicitly, with quantum computation? Let’s
begin with parallel computing architectures. The vast majority of computers in existence
are serial computers, processing instructions one at a time in some central processing
unit. By contrast, parallel computers can process more than one instruction at a time,
leading to a substantial savings in time and money for some applications. Nevertheless,
parallel processing does not offer any fundamental advantage over the standard Turing
machine model when issues of efﬁciency are concerned, because a Turing machine can
simulate a parallel computer with polynomially equivalent total physical resources – the
total space and time used by the computation. What a parallel computer gains in time,

===== PAGE 44 =====
Perspectives on computer science
163
it loses in the total spatial resources required to perform the computation, resulting in a
net of no essential change in the power of the computing model.
An interesting speciﬁc example of massively parallel computing is the technique of
DNA computing. A strand of DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, is a molecule composed
of a sequence (a polymer) of four kinds of nucleotides distinguished by the bases they
carry, denoted by the letter A (adenine), C (cytosine), G (guanine) and T (thymine).
Two strands, under certain circumstances, can anneal to form a double strand, if the
respective base pairs form complements of each other (A matches T and G matches
C). The ends are also distinct and must match appropriately. Chemical techniques can
be used to amplify the number of strands beginning or ending with speciﬁc sequences
(polymerase chain reaction), separate the strands by length (gel electrophoresis), dissolve
double strands into single strands (changing temperature and pH), read the sequence on
a strand, cut strands at a speciﬁc position (restriction enzymes), and detect if a certain
sequence of DNA is in a test tube. The procedure for using these mechanisms in a robust
manner is rather involved, but the basic idea can be appreciated from an example.
The directed Hamiltonian path problem is a simple and equivalently hard variant of
the Hamiltonian cycle problem of Section 3.2.2, in which the goal is to determine if a
path exists or not between two speciﬁed vertices j1 and jN in a directed graph G of N
vertices, entering each vertex exactly once, and following only allowed edge directions.
This problem can be solved with a DNA computer using the following ﬁve steps, in
which xj are chosen to be unique sequences of bases (and ¯xj their complements), DNA
strands xjxk encode edges, and strands ¯xj ¯xj encode vertices. (1) Generate random paths
through G, by combining a mixture of all possible vertex and edge DNA strands, and
waiting for the strands to anneal. (2) Keep only the paths beginning with j1 and ending
with jN, by amplifying only the double strands beginning with ¯xj1 and ending with ¯xjN.
(3) Select only paths of length N, by separating the strands according to their length. (4)
Select only paths which enter each vertex at least once, by dissolving the DNA into single
strands, and annealing with all possible vertex strands one at a time and ﬁltering out only
those strands which anneal. And (5) detect if any strands have survived the selection
steps; if so, then a path exists, and otherwise, it does not. To ensure the answer is correct
with sufﬁciently high probability, xj may be chosen to contain many (≈30) bases, and
a large number (≈1014 or more are feasible) of strands are used in the reaction.
Heuristic methods are available to improve upon this basic idea. Of course, exhaustive
search methods such as this only work as long as all possible paths can be generated
efﬁciently, and thus the number of molecules used must grow exponentially as the size of
the problem (the number of vertices in the example above). DNA molecules are relatively
small and readily synthesized, and the huge number of DNA combinations one can ﬁt
into a test tube can stave off the exponential complexity cost increase for a while – up
to a few dozen vertices – but eventually the exponential cost limits the applicability of
this method. Thus, while DNA computing offers an attractive and physically realizable
model of computation for the solution of certain problems, it is a classical computing
technique and offers no essential improvement in principle over a Turing machine.
Analog computers offer a yet another paradigm for performing computation. A com-
puter is analog when the physical representation of information it uses for computation
is based on continuous degrees of freedom, instead of zeroes and ones. For example,
a thermometer is an analog computer. Analog circuitry, using resistors, capacitors, and
ampliﬁers, is also said to perform analog computation. Such machines have an inﬁnite

===== PAGE 45 =====
164
Introduction to computer science
resource to draw upon in the ideal limit, since continuous variables like position and
voltage can store an unlimited amount of information. But this is only true in the absence
of noise. The presence of a ﬁnite amount of noise reduces the number of distinguishable
states of a continuous variable to a ﬁnite number – and thus restricts analog computers
to the representation of a ﬁnite amount of information. In practice, noise reduces analog
computers to being no more powerful than conventional digital computers, and through
them Turing machines. One might suspect that quantum computers are just analog com-
puters, because of the use of continuous parameters in describing qubit states; however,
it turns out that the effects of noise on a quantum computer can effectively be digitized.
As a result, their computational advantages remain even in the presence of a ﬁnite amount
of noise, as we shall see in Chapter 10.
What of the effects of noise on digital computers? In the early days of computation,
noise was a very real problem for computers. In some of the original computers a vacuum
tube would malfunction every few minutes. Even today, noise is a problem for compu-
tational devices such as modems and hard drives. Considerable effort was devoted to the
problem of understanding how to construct reliable computers from unreliable compo-
nents. It was proven by von Neumann that this is possible with only a polynomial increase
in the resources required for computation. Ironically, however, modern computers use
none of those results, because the components of modern computers are fantastically
reliable. Failure rates of 10−17 and even less are common in modern electronic compo-
nents. For this reason, failures happen so rarely that the extra effort required to protect
against them is not regarded as being worth making. On the other hand, we shall ﬁnd
that quantum computers are very delicate machines, and will likely require substantial
application of error-correction techniques.
Different architectures may change the effects of noise. For example, if the effect of
noise is ignored, then changing to a computer architecture in which many operations are
performed in parallel may not change the number of operations which need to be done.
However, a parallel system may be substantially more resistant to noise, because the effects
of noise have less time to accumulate. Therefore, in a realistic analysis, the parallel version
of an algorithm may have some substantial advantages over a serial implementation.
Architecture design is a well developed ﬁeld of study for classical computers. Hardly
anything similar has been developed along the same lines for quantum computers, but
the study of noise already suggests some desirable traits for future quantum computer
architectures, such as a high level of parallelism.
A fourth model of computation is distributed computation, in which two or more
spatially separated computational units are available to solve a computational problem.
Obviously, such a model of computation is no more powerful than the Turing machine
model in the sense that it can be efﬁciently simulated on a Turing machine. However,
distributed computation gives rise to an intriguing new resource challenge: how best to
utilize multiple computational units when the cost of communication between the units is
high. This problem of distributed computation becomes especially interesting as comput-
ers are connected through high speed networks; although the total computational capacity
of all the computers on a network might be extremely large, utilization of that potential
is difﬁcult. Most interesting problems do not divide easily into independent chunks that
can be solved separately, and may frequently require global communication between dif-
ferent computational subsystems to exchange intermediate results or synchronize status.
The ﬁeld of communication complexity has been developed to address such issues, by

===== PAGE 46 =====
Chapter problems
165
quantifying the cost of communication requirements in solving problems. When quan-
tum resources are available and can be exchanged between distributed computers, the
communication costs can sometimes be greatly reduced.
A recurring theme through these concluding thoughts and through the entire book is
that despite the traditional independence of computer science from physical constraints,
ultimately physical laws have tremendous impact not only upon how computers are
realized, but also the class of problems they are capable of solving. The success of quantum
computation and quantum information as a physically reasonable alternative model of
computation questions closely held tenets of computer science, and thrusts notions of
computer science into the forefront of physics. The task of the remainder of this book is
to stir together ideas from these disparate ﬁelds, and to delight in what results!
Problem 3.1: (Minsky machines)
A Minsky machine consists of a ﬁnite set of
registers, r1, r2, . . . , rk, each capable of holding an arbitrary non-negative
integer, and a program, made up of orders of one of two types. The ﬁrst type has
the form:
&
) *
+
,
- .
/
0
&
The interpretation is that at point m in the program register rj is incremented
by one, and execution proceeds to point n in the program. The second type of
order has the form:
&
) *
+
,
- .
/
0
'♥♥♥♥♥♥
♥♥♥♥♥♥
( (PPPPPP
PPPPPP
The interpretation is that at point m in the program, register rj is decremented
if it contains a positive integer, and execution proceeds to point n in the
program. If register rj is zero then execution simply proceeds to point p in the
program. The program for the Minsky machine consists of a collection of such
orders, of a form like:
&
) *
+
,
- .
/
0
&
) *
+
,
- .
/
0
)❋❋❋❋
❋❋❋
❋❋❋❋❋❋❋❋❋❋❋❋
!!
!
The starting and all possible halting points for the program are conventionally
labeled zero. This program takes the contents of register r1 and adds them to
register r2, while decrementing r1 to zero.

===== PAGE 47 =====
166
Introduction to computer science
(1) Prove that all (Turing) computable functions can be computed on a Minsky
machine, in the sense that given a computable function f(·) there is a
Minsky machine program that when the registers start in the state
(n, 0, . . . , 0) gives as output (f(n), 0, . . . , 0).
(2) Sketch a proof that any function which can be computed on a Minsky
machine, in the sense just deﬁned, can also be computed on a Turing
machine.
Problem 3.2: (Vector games)
A vector game is speciﬁed by a ﬁnite list of vectors,
all of the same dimension, and with integer co-ordinates. The game is to start
with a vector x of non-negative integer co-ordinates and to add to x the ﬁrst
vector from the list which preserves the non-negativity of all the components,
and to repeat this process until it is no longer possible. Prove that for any
computable function f(·) there is a vector game which when started with the
vector (n, 0, . . . , 0) reaches (f(n), 0, . . . , 0). (Hint: Show that a vector game in
k + 2 dimensions can simulate a Minsky machine containing k registers.)
Problem 3.3: (Fractran)
A Fractran program is deﬁned by a list of positive rational
numbers q1, . . . , qn. It acts on a positive integer m by replacing it by qim, where
i is the least number such that qim is an integer. If there is ever a time when
there is no i such that qim is an integer, then execution stops. Prove that for any
computable function f(·) there is a Fractran program which when started with
2n reaches 2f(n) without going through any intermediate powers of 2. (Hint: use
the previous problem.)
Problem 3.4: (Undecidability of dynamical systems)
A Fractran program is
essentially just a very simple dynamical system taking positive integers to
positive integers. Prove that there is no algorithm to decide whether such a
dynamical system ever reaches 1.
Problem 3.5: (Non-universality of two bit reversible logic)
Suppose we are
trying to build circuits using only one and two bit reversible logic gates, and
ancilla bits. Prove that there are Boolean functions which cannot be computed in
this fashion. Deduce that the Toffoli gate cannot be simulated using one and two
bit reversible gates, even with the aid of ancilla bits.
Problem 3.6: (Hardness of approximation of
)
Let r ⊇1 and suppose that
there is an approximation algorithm for
which is guaranteed to ﬁnd the
shortest tour among n cities to within a factor r. Let G = (V, E) be any graph on
n vertices. Deﬁne an instance of
by identifying cities with vertices in V , and
deﬁning the distance between cities i and j to be 1 if (i, j) is an edge of G, and to
be ∼r⊂|V | + 1 otherwise. Show that if the approximation algorithm is applied to
this instance of
then it returns a Hamiltonian cycle for G if one exists, and
otherwise returns a tour of length more than ∼r⊂|V |. From the NP-completeness
of
it follows that no such approximation algorithm can exist unless P = NP.
Problem 3.7: (Reversible Turing machines)
(1) Explain how to construct a reversible Turing machine that can compute the
same class of functions as is computable on an ordinary Turing machine.
(Hint: It may be helpful to use a multi-tape construction.)

===== PAGE 48 =====
History and further reading
167
(2) Give general space and time bounds for the operation of your reversible
Turing machine, in terms of the time t(x) and space s(x) required on an
ordinary single-tape Turing machine to compute a function f(x).
Problem 3.8: (Find a hard-to-compute class of functions (Research))
Find a
natural class of functions on n inputs which requires a super-polynomial number
of Boolean gates to compute.
Problem 3.9: (Reversible PSPACE = PSPACE)
It can be shown that the problem
‘quantiﬁed satisﬁability’, or
, is PSPACE-complete. That is, every other
language in PSPACE can be reduced to
in polynomial time. The language
is deﬁned to consist of all Boolean formulae ϕ in n variables x1, . . . , xn,
and in conjunctive normal form, such that:
∃x1∀x2∃x3 . . . ∀xn ϕ if n is even;
(3.9)
∃x1∀x2∃x3 . . . ∃xn ϕ if n is odd.
(3.10)
Prove that a reversible Turing machine operating in polynomial space can be
used to solve
. Thus, the class of languages decidable by a computer
operating reversibly in polynomial space is equal to PSPACE.
Problem 3.10: (Ancilla bits and efﬁciency of reversible computation)
Let pm
be the mth prime number. Outline the construction of a reversible circuit which,
upon input of m and n such that n > m, outputs the product pmpn, that is
(m, n) ◦(pmpn, g(m, n)), where g(m, n) is the ﬁnal state of the ancilla bits
used by the circuit. Estimate the number of ancilla qubits your circuit requires.
Prove that if a polynomial (in log n) size reversible circuit can be found that uses
O(log(log n)) ancilla bits then the problem of factoring a product of two prime
numbers is in P.
History and further reading
Computer science is a huge subject with many interesting subﬁelds. We cannot hope
for any sort of completeness in this brief space, but instead take the opportunity to
recommend a few titles of general interest, and some works on subjects of speciﬁc interest
in relation to topics covered in this book, with the hope that they may prove stimulating.
Modern computer science dates to the wonderful 1936 paper of Turing[Tur36]. The
Church–Turing thesis was ﬁrst stated by Church[Chu36] in 1936, and was then given
a more complete discussion from a different point of view by Turing. Several other
researchers found their way to similar conclusions at about the same time. Many of
these contributions and a discussion of the history may be found in a volume edited
by Davis[Dav65]. Provocative discussions of the Church–Turing thesis and undecidability
may be found in Hofstadter[Hof79] and Penrose[Pen89].
There are many excellent books on algorithm design. We mention only three. First,
there is the classic series by Knuth[Knu97, Knu98a, Knu98b] which covers an enormous portion
of computer science. Second, there is the marvelous book by Cormen, Leiserson, and
Rivest[CLR90]. This huge book contains a plethora of well-written material on many areas

===== PAGE 49 =====
168
Introduction to computer science
of algorithm design. Finally, the book of Motwani and Raghavan[MR95] is an excellent
survey of the ﬁeld of randomized algorithms.
The modern theory of computational complexity was especially inﬂuenced by the
papers of Cook[Coo71] and Karp[Kar72]. Many similar ideas were arrived at independently
in Russia by Levin[Lev73], but unfortunately took time to propagate to the West. The
classic book by Garey and Johnson[GJ79] has also had an enormous inﬂuence on the
ﬁeld. More recently, Papadimitriou[Pap94] has written a beautiful book that surveys many
of the main ideas of computational complexity theory. Much of the material in this
chapter is based upon Papadimitriou’s book. In this chapter we considered only one type
of reducibility between languages, polynomial time reducibility. There are many other
notions of reductions between languages. An early survey of these notions was given by
Ladner, Lynch and Selman[LLS75]. The study of different notions of reducibility later
blossomed into a subﬁeld of research known as structural complexity, which has been
reviewed by Balc´azar, Diaz, and Gabarr´o[BDG88a, BDG88b].
The connection between information, energy dissipation, and computation has a long
history. The modern understanding is due to a 1961 paper by Landauer[Lan61], in which
Landauer’s principle was ﬁrst formulated. A paper by Szilard[Szi29] and a 1949 lecture
by von Neumann[von66] (page 66) arrive at conclusions close to Landauer’s principle, but
do not fully grasp the essential point that it is the erasure of information that requires
dissipation.
Reversible Turing machines were invented by Lecerf[Lec63] and later, but indepen-
dently, in an inﬂuential paper by Bennett[Ben73]. Fredkin and Toffoli[FT82] introduced
reversible circuit models of computation. Two interesting historical documents are Bar-
ton’s May, 1978 MIT 6.895 term paper[Bar78], and Ressler’s 1981 Master’s thesis[Res81],
which contain designs for a reversible PDP-10! Today, reversible logic is potentially
important in implementations of low-power CMOS circuitry[YK95].
Maxwell’s demon is a fascinating subject, with a long and intricate history. Maxwell
proposed his demon in 1871[Max71]. Szilard published a key paper in 1929[Szi29] which an-
ticipated many of the details of the ﬁnal resolution of the problem of Maxwell’s demon.
In 1965 Feynman[FLS65b] resolved a special case of Maxwell’s demon. Bennett, build-
ing on Landauer’s work[Lan61], wrote two beautiful papers on the subject[BBBW82, Ben87]
which completed the resolution of the problem. An interesting book about the history of
Maxwell’s demon and its exorcism is the collection of papers by Leff and Rex[LR90].
DNA computing was invented by Adleman, and the solution of the directed Hamil-
tonian path problem we describe is his[Adl94]. Lipton has also shown how
and
circuit satisﬁability can be solved in this model[Lip95]. A good general article is Adleman’s
Scientiﬁc American article[Adl98]; for an insightful look into the universality of DNA
operations, see Winfree[Win98]. An interesting place to read about performing reliable
computation in the presence of noise is the book by Winograd and Cowan[WC67]. This
topic will be addressed again in Chapter 10. A good textbook on computer architecture
is by Hennessey, Goldberg, and Patterson.[HGP96].
Problems 3.1 through 3.4 explore a line of thought originated by Minsky (in his
beautiful book on computational machines[Min67]) and developed by Conway[Con72, Con86].
The Fractran programming language is certainly one of the most beautiful and elegant
universal computational models known, as demonstrated by the following example, known

===== PAGE 50 =====
History and further reading
169
as PRIMEGAME[Con86]. PRIMEGAME is deﬁned by the list of rational numbers:
17
91; 78
85; 19
51; 23
38; 29
33; 77
29; 95
23; 77
19; 1
17; 11
13; 13
11; 15
2 ; 1
7; 55
1 .
(3.11)
Amazingly, when PRIMEGAME is started at 2, the other powers of 2 that appear,
namely, 22, 23, 25, 27, 211, 213, . . . , are precisely the prime powers of 2, with the powers
stepping through the prime numbers, in order. Problem 3.9 is a special case of the more
general subject of the spatial requirements for reversible computation. See the papers by
Bennett[Ben89], and by Li, Tromp and Vitanyi[LV96, LTV98].

===== PAGE 51 =====

